improving merging conditions for recomposing
conformance checking
wai lam jonathan lee1, jorge munoz-gama1, h.m.w. verbeek2,
wil m.p. van der aalst3, and marcos sep ´ulveda1
1pontiﬁcia universidad cat ´olica de chile (chile)
{walee,jmun}@uc.cl ,marcos@ing.puc.cl ,
2eindhoven university of technology, (the netherlands)
h.m.w.verbeek@tue.nl
3rwth aachen university, (germany)
wvdaalst@pads.rwth-aachen.de
abstract. efﬁcient conformance checking is a hot topic in the ﬁeld of pro-
cess mining. much of the recent work focused on improving the scalability of
alignment-based approaches to support the larger and more complex processes.
this is needed because process mining is increasingly applied in areas where
models and logs are “big”. decomposition techniques are able to achieve signif-
icant performance gains by breaking down a conformance problem into smaller
ones. moreover, recent work showed that the alignment problem can be resolved
in an iterative manner by alternating between aligning a set of decomposed sub-
components before merging the computed sub-alignments and recomposing sub-
components to ﬁx merging issues. despite experimental results showing the gain
of applying recomposition in large scenarios, there is still a need for improving
the merging step, where log traces can take numerous recomposition steps be-
fore reaching the required merging condition. this paper contributes by deﬁning
and structuring the recomposition step, and proposes strategies with signiﬁcant
performance improvement on synthetic and real-life datasets over both the state-
of-the-art decomposed and monolithic approaches.
keywords: recomposition, conformance checking, process mining
1 introduction
in today’s organizations, it is important to ensure that process executions follow the
protocols prescribed by process stakeholders so that compliance is maintained. confor-
mance checking in process mining compares event data with the corresponding process
model to identify commonalities and discrepancies [2]. detailed diagnostics provide
novel insights into the magnitude and effect of deviations. the state-of-the-art in con-
formance checking are alignment-based techniques that provide detailed explanations
of the observed behavior in terms of modeled behavior [4].
however, one of the limitations of alignment-based approaches is the explosion
of state-space during the alignment computation. for example, the classic cost-based
alignment approach [4] in the worst case is exponential with respect to the model size
[5].2 lee, munoz-gama, verbeek, van der aalst, and sep ´ulveda
one research line focuses on decomposition techniques which break down a con-
formance problem into smaller sub-problems [1]. experimental results have shown that
decomposed approaches can be several times faster than their monolithic counterparts
and can compute alignments for datasets that were previously infeasible. but until re-
cently, decomposition techniques have been limited to resolving the decision problem
of deciding if a log trace is perfectly ﬁtting with the model. as a result, reliable diagnos-
tics are missing. however, recent work has shown that overall alignment results can be
computed under decomposed conformance checking by using the so-called recomposi-
tionapproach. a framework that computes overall alignment results in a decomposed
manner was presented in [10, 11].
a key result of the work is in deﬁning and proving the border agreement condition
which permits the merging of sub-alignment results as an overall result. if the condition
is not met, the decomposed sub-components are “recomposed” to encourage the merg-
ing condition in the next alignment iteration. experimental results have shown signiﬁ-
cant performance gains using recomposition, but they have also shown that the merging
aspect of the framework can become a performance bottleneck where log traces may
require numerous recompositions to reach the merging condition. under this context,
this paper is a step towards that direction by deﬁning and structuring the recomposi-
tion step, proposing different recomposition strategies, and evaluating their impact to
the overall computation time. the experimental results show that by applying the pre-
sented recomposition strategies, exact alignment results can be computed on synthetic
and real-life datasets much faster.
the remainder of the paper is structured as follows: section 2 introduces the re-
quired notations and concepts. in particular, section 2.2 presents the recomposition
approach as the focus of the paper. section 3 deﬁnes and structures the recomposition
step and sheds light on the limitations of the existing recomposition strategies. sec-
tion 4 presents four recomposition strategies that can be used in the recomposition step.
section 5 details the experimental setup for the evaluation of the proposed strategies,
and section 6 analyzes the experimental results. section 7 presents the related work.
finally, section 8 presents some conclusions and future work.
2 preliminaries
this section introduces basic concepts related to process models, event logs, and align-
ment-based conformance checking techniques.
letxbe a set.b(x)denotes the set of all possible multisets over set x, andx
denotes the set of all possible sequences over set x.hidenotes the empty sequence.
concatenation of sequences 12xand22xis denoted as 12. given a tuple
x= (x1;x2;:::;xn)2x1x2:::xn,i(x) =xidenotes the projection
operator for all i2f1;:::;ng. this operator is extended to sequences so that given
a sequence2(x1x2:::xn)of lengthmwith=h(x11;x21;:::;
xn1);(x12;x22;:::;xn2);:::; (x1m;x2m;:::;xnm)i,i() =hxi1;xi2;:::;ximifor
alli21;:::;n . projection is also deﬁned over sets and functions recursively. given
yxand a sequence 2x,hiy=hi, and (hxi)y=hxiyifx2y, andimproving merging conditions for recomposing conformance checking 3
fig. 1. system net sthat models a loan application process (adapted from [6])
(hxi)y=yifx =2y. similarly, given a function f:x!yand a sequence
=hx1;x2;:::;xni2x,f() =hf(x1);f(x2);:::;f (xn)i.
2.1 preliminaries on petri net, event log, and net decomposition
in this paper, petri nets are used to represent process models.
deﬁnition 1 (labeled petri net). letpdenote a set of places, tdenote a set of tran-
sitions, and f(pt)[(tp)denote the ﬂow relation. a labeled petri net
n= (p;t;f;l )is a petri net (p;t;f )with labeling function l2t9uawhereua
is some universe of activity labels.
in a process setting, there is typically a well-deﬁned start and end to an instance of
the process. this can be denoted with the initial and ﬁnal marking of a system net.
deﬁnition 2 (system net). a system net is a triplet s= (n;i;o )wheren= (p;t;
f;l)is a labeled petri net, i2b(p)is the initial state and o2b(p)is the ﬁnal state.
f(s)is the set of transition sequences that reach the ﬁnal state when started in the
initial state. if is a transition sequence, then l(dom(l))is an activity sequence.
tv(s) = dom(l)is the set of visible transitions ins.tu
v(s) =ft2tv(s)j
8t02tv(s)l(t) =l(t0))t=t0gis the set of unique visible transitions in s.
figure 1 presents a system net sthat models a loan application process (ignore the
grey boxes in the background for now). [i]is the initial marking and [o]is the ﬁnal
marking. an example activity sequence is ha;b;c;d;f;g;h;i;kiwhich corresponds to
the occurred events of a successful loan application. the process executions in real-life
are recorded as event data and can be expressed as an event log.
deﬁnition 3 (trace, event log). letauabe a set of activities. a trace 2ais
a sequence of activities. an event log l2b(a)is a multiset of traces.
figure 2 presents an event log lcorresponding to the system net in figure 1. log l
has 20 cases in total with 5 cases following trace 1, 10 cases following trace 2, and
5 cases following trace 3. in cost-based alignment conformance checking, a trace is
aligned with the corresponding system net to produce an alignment.4 lee, munoz-gama, verbeek, van der aalst, and sep ´ulveda
l= [1z }| {
ha;b;c;d;f;g;h;i;ki5;2z }| {
ha;c;b;d;f;g;i;h;ki10;3z }| {
ha;c;b;d;f;g;j;ki5]
fig. 2. running example: event log l
deﬁnition 4 (alignment [4]). letl2 b(a)be an event log with a ua, let
l2lbe a log trace and m2f(s)a complete transition sequence of system net
s. an alignment of landmis a sequence of pairs 2((a[fg )(t[fg ))
where1()a=l,2()t=m,8(a;t)2a6=_t6=, and8(a;t)2a6=
^(t=_a=l(t)).
each pair in an alignment is a legal move . there are four types of legal moves: a
synchronous move (a;t)means that the activity matches the activity of the transition,
i.e.,a=l(t), alog move (a;)means that there is a step in the log that is not matched
by a corresponding step in the model, a model move (;t)wheret2dom(l)means
that there is a step in the model that is not matched by a corresponding step in the log,
and an invisible move (;t)wheret2tndom(l)means that the step in the model
corresponds to an invisible transition that is not observable in the log.
deﬁnition 5 (valid decomposition [1] and border activities [11]). lets= (n;i;o )
withn= (p;t;f;l )be a system net. d=fs1;s2;:::;sngis a valid decomposition
if and only if the following properties are fulﬁlled:
–si= (ni;ii;oi)is a system net with ni= (pi;ti;fi;li)for all 1in.
–li=ltifor all 1in.
–pi\pj=;andti\tjtu
v(s)for all 1i<jn.
–p=s
1inpi,t=s
1inti, andf=s
1infi.
d(s)is the set of all valid decompositions of s.
ab(d) =fl(t)j91i<jnt2ti\tjgis the set of border activities of the valid
decomposition d. to retrieve the sub-nets that share the same border activity, for an
activitya2rng(l),sb(a;d) =fsi2dja2rng(li)gis the set of sub-nets that
containaas an observable activity.
figure 1 presents a valid decomposition dof net swhere sub-nets are marked by
the grey boxes. for example, sub-net s1consists of the transitions t1,t2,t3,t4,t5, and
t6. border activities can be identiﬁed as the activities of the transitions that are shared
between two sub-nets. they are t4,t5,t6,t8,t11, and t12. under the recomposition
approach framework, overall alignments can be computed in a decomposed manner.
2.2 recomposing conformance checking
figure 3 presents an overview of the recomposing conformance checking framework
[11, 10] which consists of the following ﬁve steps: (1) the net and log are decomposed
using a decomposition strategy, e.g., maximal decomposition [1]. (2) alignment-basedimproving merging conditions for recomposing conformance checking 5
fig. 3. recomposing conformance checking framework with the recomposition step highlighted
in dark blue
conformance checking is performed per sub-net and sub-log to produce a set of sub-
alignments for each log trace. (3) since sub-components overlap on border activities,
the set of sub-alignments for each log trace also overlap on moves involving border
activities. in [11], it was shown that if the sub-alignments synchronize on these moves,
then they can be merged as an overall optimal alignment using the merging algorithm
presented in [18]. this condition was formalized as the total border agreement condi-
tion. log traces that do not meet the requirement are either rejected or left for the next
iteration. as such, only border activities can cause merge conﬂicts. (4) user-conﬁgured
termination conditions are checked at the end of each iteration. if the framework is ter-
minated before computing the overall optimal alignments for all log traces, then an ap-
proximate overall result is given. the results of the framework consist of a ﬁtness value
and a set of alignments corresponding to the log traces. in the case of an approximate
result, the ﬁtness value would be an interval bounding the exact ﬁtness value and the
set of alignments would have pseudo alignments. (5) if there are remaining log traces
to be aligned and the termination conditions are not reached, then a recomposition step
is taken to produce a new net decomposition and a corresponding set of sub-logs. the
next iteration of the framework then starts from step (2).
while experimental results have shown signiﬁcant performance gains from the re-
composition approach over its monolithic counterpart, large scale experimentation has
shown that recomposition is a potential bottleneck. in particular, the strategies used
at the recomposition step can have a signiﬁcant impact. the following section takes a
more detailed look at the recomposition step and discusses the limitations of the current
recomposition strategies.
3 recomposition step
the recomposition step refers to step (5) of the framework overview presented in fig-
ure 3 and is highlighted in dark blue. we formalize the step in two parts: the production
of a new net decomposition and a corresponding set of sub-logs.
deﬁnition 6 (recomposition step). letd2d(s)be a valid decomposition of system
netsand letl=b(a)be an event log. for 1in, wheren=jdj, let6 lee, munoz-gama, verbeek, van der aalst, and sep ´ulveda
mi= (ai[fg )(ti[fg )be the possible alignment moves for a sub-component
so that  d= [(i1;:::;in)2m
1:::m
nj9i2l8j2f1;:::;ng1(ij)aj=iaj]
contains the latest sub-alignments for all log traces. given the valid decomposition,
and the latest sub-alignments, rs:d(s)b(m
1:::m
n)!d (s)creates a
new valid decomposition d02d(s)wherem=jd0j<jdj. then, given the new
and current net decompositions, the event log, and the latest sub-alignments, rl:
d(s)d(s)b(a)b(m
1:::m
n)9b(a0
1):::b(a0
m)creates a set
of sub-logs to align in the following iteration of the recomposition approach. overall,
the recomposition step rcreates a new net decomposition and a corresponding set of
sub-logs,r:d(s)b(a)b(m
1:::m
n)9d(s)b(a0
1):::b(a0
m).
the current recomposition strategy involves recomposing on the most frequent con-
ﬂicting activities (mfc) and constructing sub-logs that contains to-be-aligned traces
which carry conﬂicting activities that have been recomposed upon (ic).
most frequent conﬂict (mfc) recomposes the current net decomposition on the ac-
tivity setar=fa2ab(d)ja2argmaxa02ab(d)p
i2supp( d)c(i)(a0)gwhere
 d2b(m
1:::m
n)are the latest sub-alignments and c:m
1:::m
n!b(a)
is a function that gives the multiset of conﬂicting activities of sub-alignments. hence,
arcontains the border activities with the most conﬂicts.
inclusion by conﬂict (ic) then creates a log lr= [i2lj9a2ab(d)c(i)(a)>
0^a2ar]wherei2 dare the sub-alignments of trace i2land net decomposi-
tiond2d(s). as such, log lrincludes to-be-aligned log traces which have conﬂicts
on at least one of the border activities that have been recomposed upon. later, log lris
then projected onto the new net decomposition to create the corresponding sub-logs.
3.1 limitations to the current recomposition strategies
to explain the limitations, we refer to the set of optimal sub-alignments in figure 4
from aligning net decomposition din figure 1 and log lin figure 2. we ﬁrst note
that for the conﬂicting activities which are highlighted in grey:p
2 dc()(c) = 2 ,p
2 dc()(i) = 1 , andp
2 dc()(j) = 1 , where  d=f1;2;3g. with ac-
tivity cbeing the most frequent conﬂicting activity, mfc recomposes the current net
decomposition on ar=fcgand ic creates the corresponding sub-logs containing
lr=f2;3gsince both traces have activity cas a conﬂicting activity. the new net
decomposition will contain three sub-nets rather than four where sub-net s1and sub-net
s2are recomposed upon activity cas a single sub-net. the corresponding sub-log set is
created by projecting log lronto the new net decomposition.
while one merge conﬂict is resolved by recomposing on activity c, the merge con-
ﬂicts at activity iandjwill remain in the following iteration. in fact, under the current
recomposition strategy, trace 2and3have to be aligned three times each to reach
the required merging condition to yield overall alignments. this shows the limitation of
mfc in only partially resolving merge conﬂicts on the trace level and ic in leniently in-
cluding to-be-aligned log traces whose subsequent sub-alignments are unlikely to reach
the necessary merging condition.improving merging conditions for recomposing conformance checking 7
fig. 4. sub-alignments 1= (11;12;13;14),2= (21;22;23;24), and 3= (31;
32;33;34)of logl1and net decomposition d1with merge conﬂicts highlighted in grey
as such, the key to improving the existing recomposition strategies is in lifting
conﬂict resolution from the individual activity level to the trace level so that the net re-
composition strategy resolves merge conﬂicts of traces rather than activities and the log
recomposition strategy selects log traces whose merge conﬂicts are likely to be fully
resolved with the latest net recomposition. in the following section, three net recom-
position strategies and one log recomposition strategy are presented. these strategies
improve on the existing ones by looking at merge conﬂict sets, identifying co-occurring
conﬂicting activities, and minimizing the average size of the resulting recomposed sub-
nets. the later experimental results show that the strategies lead to signiﬁcant perfor-
mance improvements in both synthetic and real-life datasets.
4 recomposition strategies
in this section, three net recomposition strategies and one log recomposition strategy
are presented.
4.1 net recomposition strategies
as previously shown, resolving individual conﬂicting activities may only partially re-
solve the merge conﬂicts of traces. this key observation motivates the following net
recomposition strategies which target conﬂicts at the trace level.
topkmost frequent conﬂict set (mfcs- k)constructs a multiset of conﬂict sets acs=
[supp (c())ab(d)j2 d^jc()j>0]. then the top kmost frequent conﬂict
setacs;kfacsab(d)jacs(acs)>0gis selected. ifjacsj< k, then all conﬂict
sets are taken. afterwards, the recomposing activity set ar=[(acs;k)ab(d)is
created. we note that in the case where two conﬂict sets have the same occurrence
frequency, a random one is chosen. this secondary criterion avoids bias, and gives
better performances empirically than any other straightforward criteria.
merge conﬂict graph (mcg) recomposes on conﬂicting activities that co-occur on the
trace level by constructing a weighted undirected graph g= (v;e)wheree=ffa1;
a2gj92 da12c()^a22c()^a16=a2gwith a weight function w:e!n+
such thatw((a1;a2)) =jf2 djc()(a1)>0^c()(a2)>0gjandv=
fa2ab(d)j9(a1;a2)2ea=a1_a=a2g. then, with a threshold t2[0;1], edges8 lee, munoz-gama, verbeek, van der aalst, and sep ´ulveda
are ﬁltered so that ef=fe2ejw(e)twmaxgwherewmaxis the maximum
edge weight in e. the corresponding vertex set and ﬁltered graph can be created as
vf=fa2ab(d)j9(a1;a2)2efa=a1_a=a2gandgf= (vf;ef). finally, the
current net decomposition is recomposed on activity set ar=vf.
balanced. this recomposition strategy extends the mfcs- kstrategy but also tries to
minimize the average size of the sub-nets resulting from the recomposition. for a border
activitya2ab(d),j(a;d)j=j[si2sb(a;d)av(si)japproximates the size of the
recomposed sub-net on activity a. the average size of the recomposed sub-nets for a
particular conﬂict set can then be approximated by j(ac;d)j=p
a2acj(a;d)j
jacj. the
score of the conﬂict set can be computed as a weighted combination (ac;d) =w0
m(ac)
maxa0c2acsm(a0
c)+w1(1 j(ac;d)j
maxa0c2acsj(a0
c;d)j)where higher scores are assigned to
frequent conﬂict sets that do not recompose to create large sub-nets. the activities of the
conﬂict sets with the highest score, ar=fa2acjac2argmaxa0c2acs(a0
c;d)g,
are then recomposed upon to create a net decomposition.
4.2 log recomposition strategy
similar to the net recomposition strategies, the existing ic strategy can be too lenient
in including log traces which have conﬂicting activities that are unlikely to be resolved
in the following decomposed replay iteration.
strict include by conﬂict (sic) increases the requirement for a to-be-aligned log trace
to be selected for the next iteration. this addresses the limitation of ic which can in-
clude log traces whose merge conﬂicts are only partially covered by the net recomposi-
tion. given the recomposed activity set ar, sic includes log traces as lr= [i2lj
8a2c(i)a2ar]with merge conﬂict if the corresponding conﬂict set is a subset of set
ar. however, this log strategy only works in conjunction with the net strategies that are
based on conﬂict sets, i.e., mfcs- kand balanced, so that at least one to-be-aligned log
trace is included.
5 experiment setup
both synthetic and real-life datasets are used to evaluate the proposed recomposition
strategies. dataset generation is performed using the ptandloggenerator [8] and infor-
mation from the empirical study [9]; it is reproducible as a rapidprom workﬂow [3].
the bpic 2018 dataset is used [16] as the real-life dataset. moreover, two baseline net
recomposition strategies are used: allrecomposes on all conﬂicting activities, and ran-
dom recomposes on a random number of conﬂicting activities. similarly, a baseline log
recomposition allwhich includes all to-be-aligned log traces is used. for the sake of
space, the full experimental setup and datasets are available at the github repository4
so that the experimental results can be reproduced.
4seehttps://github.com/wailamjonathanlee/characterizing-recomposing-replayimproving merging conditions for recomposing conformance checking 9
fig. 5. bar chart showing ﬁtness and overall time per net recomposition strategy (including the
monolithic approach). the time limit is shown as a dashed red line and indicates infeasible re-
plays. best performing approaches and their time gains from the second fastest times are speciﬁed
by black arrows.
6 results
the results shed light on two key insights: first, the selection of the recomposition
approach may lead to very different performances. second, good performance requires
both selecting appropriate conﬂicting activities and well-grouped to-be-aligned log traces.
figure 5 presents the experimental results for both synthetic and real-life datasets.
for each of the synthetic models, there are three event logs of different noise proﬁles
described as net x-noise probability -dispersion over trace wherex2 f1;2;3g. for
the sake of readability, we only show the results of three out of ﬁve synthetic datasets,
but the results are consistent across all ﬁve synthetic datasets). readers interested in
more details are referred to the github link for a detailed explanation on noise genera-
tion and the rest of the experimental results. for the mfcs- kand balanced strategies,
only conﬁgurations using the sic log strategy are shown; results showed that the sic
log strategy provides a better performance. for the others where sic is not applica-
ble, only conﬁgurations using the ic log strategy are shown as results indicated better
performances. overall, the results show that for both the monolithic and recomposition
approach, it is more difﬁcult to compute alignment results for less ﬁtting datasets.
different approaches give different performances. comparing the monolithic and
recomposition approach, it is clear that the recomposition approach provides a better
performance than the monolithic counterpart under at least one recomposition strategy
conﬁguration. furthermore, performance can vary signiﬁcantly across different recom-
position approaches. for example, the existing mfc strategy is the worst performing
strategy where it is not able to give exact results for the real-life dataset and both the
netx-10-60 and net x-60-10 noise scenarios of the synthetic datasets. the mfcs- kand
balanced strategies are shown to be the best performing strategies. while for high ﬁt-
ness scenarios, i.e., net x-10-10, mfcs- kgive better performances with a high k= 10 .
this is because when there is little noise, it becomes simply a “race” to aligning traces
with similar merge conﬂicts. conversely, for low ﬁtness scenarios, because merge con-10 lee, munoz-gama, verbeek, van der aalst, and sep ´ulveda
fig. 6. comparing log strategies by showcasing the number of aligned traces (left) and percentage
of valid alignments (right) per iteration on the real-life dataset bpic18.
ﬂicts are potentially much more difﬁcult to resolve, the balanced strategy avoids quickly
creating large sub-components that take longer to replay. in these cases, the time dif-
ferences between the different feasible strategies can go up to three minutes. for all
the experiments, the proposed recomposition strategies outperform the baseline strate-
gies. lastly, for the real-life dataset bpic18, only the mfcs-1, balanced, and mcg
recomposition strategies are able to compute exact alignment results and the balanced
strategy outperforms mfcs-1 by more than three minutes.
both net and log recomposition strategies matter. figure 6 presents the number of
aligned traces and percentage of valid alignments per iterations under all, ic, and sic
log strategies with net strategy ﬁxed as balanced on bpic18. we ﬁrst note that only
the sic log strategy resulted with exact alignment results. while all strategies start with
aligning all traces in the ﬁrst iteration, there are signiﬁcant differences in the number
of aligned traces across iterations. similar to the all strategy, the existing ic strategy
includes a high number of traces to align throughout all iterations; the number of aligned
traces only tapered off in the later iterations as half of the traces have resulted as valid
alignments. this conﬁrms the hypothesis that the existing ic strategy can be too lenient
with the inclusion of traces to align. furthermore, up until iteration 13, none of the
aligned traces reaches the necessary merging condition to result as a valid alignment;
this means that both the all and ic strategies are “wasting” resources aligning many
traces. conversely, the sic strategy keeps the numberof traces to align per iteration
comparatively lower. moreover, at the peak of the number of traces to align at iteration
21, almost 80% of the 300aligned traces resulted as valid alignments. these are likely
to explain why only the sic log strategy is able to compute an exact result.
7 related work
performance problems related to alignment-based conformance checking form a well-
known problem. a large number of conformance checking techniques have been pro-
posed to tackle this issue. approximate alignments have been proposed to reduce the
problem complexity by abstracting sequential information from segments of log traces
[14]. the notion of indication relations has been used to reduce the model and logimproving merging conditions for recomposing conformance checking 11
prior to conformance checking [15]. several approaches have been proposed along the
research line of decomposition techniques. this include different decomposition strate-
gies, e.g., maximal [1], and sese-based [12]. moreover, different decomposed replay
approaches such as the hide-and-reduce replay [17] and the recomposition approach
[11] have also been investigated. compared to the existing work, this paper investi-
gates different strategies for the recomposition approach in order to improve the overall
performance in computation time.
other than the alignment-based approach, there are also other conformance check-
ing approaches. this includes the classical token replay [13], behavioral proﬁle ap-
proaches [19] and more recently approaches based on event structures [7].
8 conclusions and future work
this paper investigated the recomposition aspect of the recomposing conformance check-
ing approach which can become a bottleneck to the overall performance. by deﬁning
the recomposition problem, the paper identiﬁes limitations of the current recomposi-
tion strategy in not fully resolving merge conﬂicts on the trace level and also being too
lenient in the inclusion of log traces for the subsequent decomposed replay iteration.
based on the observations, three net recomposition strategies and one log recomposi-
tion strategy have been presented. the strategies were then evaluated on both synthetic
and real-life datasets with two baseline approaches. the results show that different re-
composition strategies can signiﬁcantly impact the overall performance in computing
alignments. moreover, they show that the presented approaches provide a better perfor-
mance than baseline approaches, and both the existing recomposition and monolithic
approaches. while simpler strategies tend to provide a better performance for synthetic
datasets, a more sophisticated strategy can perform better for a real-life dataset. how-
ever, the results show that both the selection of activities to recompose on and log traces
to include are important to achieve superior performances.
future work. the results have shown that the recomposition strategy has a signiﬁcant
impact on performance. we plan to extend the evaluation of the presented approaches
to a larger variety of models, noise scenarios, initial decomposition strategies, and other
real-life datasets. for the current and presented approaches, new net decompositions are
created by recomposing the initial decomposition on selected activities. entirely differ-
ent net decompositions can be created using the merge conﬂict information from the
previous iteration; however, our preliminary results showed that this may be difﬁcult.
lastly, in the current framework, the same strategies (both decomposition and recom-
position) are used in all iterations; higher level meta-strategies might be useful. for
example, it might be good to switch to the monolithic approach for a small number of
log traces that cannot be aligned following many iterations.
acknowledgments. this work is partially supported by conicyt-pcha / doctorado
nacional / 2017-21170612 , fondecyt iniciaci ´on 11170092, conicyt apoyo a la
formaci ´on de redes internacionales para investigadores en etapa inicial redi170136 ,
thevicerrector ´ıa de investigaci ´on de la pontiﬁcia universidad cat ´olica de chile / con-
curso estad ´ıas y pasant ´ıas breves 2016 , and the departamento de ciencias de la com-12 lee, munoz-gama, verbeek, van der aalst, and sep ´ulveda
putaci ´on uc / fond-dcc-2017-0001 . the authors would like to thank alfredo bolt for
his comments on the data generation details.
references
1. van der aalst, w.m.p.: decomposing petri nets for process mining: a generic approach.
distributed and parallel databases 31(4), 471–507 (2013)
2. van der aalst, w.m.p.: process mining - data science in action. springer (2016)
3. van der aalst, w.m.p., bolt, a., van zelst, s.j.: rapidprom: mine your processes and not
just your data. corr abs/1703.03740 (2017)
4. adriansyah, a.: aligning observed and modeled behavior. ph.d. thesis, technische uni-
versiteit eindhoven (2014)
5. van dongen, b.f., carmona, j., chatain, t., taymouri, f.: aligning modeled and observed
behavior: a compromise between computation complexity and quality. in: caise 2017,
essen, germany, june 12-16, 2017, proceedings. pp. 94–109 (2017)
6. dumas, m., rosa, m.l., mendling, j., reijers, h.a.: fundamentals of business process
management. springer (2013)
7. garc ´ıa-ba ˜nuelos, l., van beest, n., dumas, m., rosa, m.l., mertens, w.: complete and
interpretable conformance checking of business processes. ieee trans. software eng. 44(3),
262–290 (2018), https://doi.org/10.1109/tse.2017.2668418
8. jouck, t., depaire, b.: ptandloggenerator: a generator for artiﬁcial event data. in: bpm
(demos). ceur workshop proceedings, vol. 1789, pp. 23–27. ceur-ws.org (2016)
9. kunze, m., luebbe, a., weidlich, m., weske, m.: towards understanding process modeling
— the case of the bpm academic initiative. in: international workshop on business process
modeling notation. pp. 44–58. springer (2011)
10. lee, w.l.j., verbeek, h.m.w., munoz-gama, j., van der aalst, w.m.p., sep ´ulveda, m.: re-
play using recomposition: alignment-based conformance checking in the large. in: proceed-
ings of the bpm demo track and bpm dissertation award, barcelona, spain, september
13, 2017. ceur workshop proceedings, vol. 1920. ceur-ws.org (2017)
11. lee, w.l.j., verbeek, h., munoz-gama, j., van der aalst, w.m.p., sep ´ulveda, m.: re-
composing conformance: closing the circle on decomposed alignment-based confor-
mance checking in process mining. (under review) (2017), processmininguc.com/
publications
12. munoz-gama, j., carmona, j., van der aalst, w.m.p.: single-entry single-exit decomposed
conformance checking. inf. syst. 46, 102–122 (2014)
13. rozinat, a., van der aalst, w.m.p.: conformance checking of processes based on monitoring
real behavior. inf. syst. 33(1), 64–95 (2008)
14. taymouri, f., carmona, j.: a recursive paradigm for aligning observed behavior of large
structured process models. in: bpm 2016, rio de janeiro, brazil, september 18-22, 2016.
proceedings. pp. 197–214 (2016)
15. taymouri, f., carmona, j.: model and event log reductions to boost the computation of
alignments. in: simpda 2016, graz, austria, december 15-16, 2016. pp. 50–62 (2016)
16. van dongen, b.f., borchert, f.: bpi challenge 2018 (2018)
17. verbeek, h.m.w.: decomposed replay using hiding and reduction as abstraction. lncs
transactions on petri nets and other models of concurrency (topnoc) xii, 166–186 (2017)
18. verbeek, h.m.w., van der aalst, w.m.p.: merging alignments for decomposed replay. in:
kordon, f., moldt, d. (eds.) petri nets 2016, toru ´n, poland, june 19-24, 2016. proceed-
ings. lecture notes in computer science, vol. 9698, pp. 219–239. springer (2016)
19. weidlich, m., polyvyanyy, a., desai, n., mendling, j., weske, m.: process compliance anal-
ysis based on behavioural proﬁles. inf. syst. 36(7), 1009–1025 (2011)