  
 
festschrift for prof. dr. dr. h.c. dr. h.c. jörg becker 2019  
 structuring behavior or not,   
that is the question  
wil van der aalst , rwth aachen university, wvdaalst@pads.rwth- aachen.de 
abstract  
process models aim to structure behavior  for a variety of reasons: discussion, analysis, improvement, 
implementation, and automation. traditionally, process models were obtained through mode ling and 
structure could be enforced, e.g., by streamlining  or simplifying  processes. however, process discov-
ery techniques that start from  the actual behavior  shed new light on this. these  techniques return pro-
cess models that are either formal (precisely describing the possible behaviors) or informal (merely a 
“picture” not allowing for any form of formal re asoning). both types of model aim to structure reality. 
however, reality is often very different and much more variable than expected by stakeholders. pro-
cess mining often reveals an "inconvenient truth" which  provide s the  valuable insights needed to 
improve a wide variety of processes. this contribution, devoted to jörg becker's 60th birthday, re-
flects on the notion of "structure" in a world where event data are omnipresent.  
 
keywords: process mining, business process management, vagueness in models, process discovery.  
 
1 introduction 
it is a great pleasure to contribute to this "festschrift " devoted to jörg becker's 60th birthday. jörg has 
been one of germany's leading "wirtschaftsinformatiker" for decades and played a key role in the 
development of the  field. he worked on many topics related to information systems (e -business, e -
government, information modeling, it maturity, reference mode ling, etc.) and is probably best known 
for his work on bu siness process management (bpm) ( becker, rosemann, & von ut hmann, 2000 ; 
becker, knackstedt, & pöppelbuß, 2009 ; becker, beverungen, & knackstedt, 2010;  röglinger, pöp-
pelbuß, & becker, 2012).  
jörg becker supervised numerous phd  students of which many became very successful in both aca-
demia and industry. he created a n "is school" where the credo is: "structure, structure, structure ". his 
guiding principle has been that information system engineering is all about finding a suitable structure. 
process modeling and information modeling play a key role in this.  
this contr ibution focuses on the interplay between structure and data  (van der aalst, 2016) . when 
dealing with real processes,  one often finds that process executions follow a pareto distribution . some 
behaviors are highly frequent an easy to capture. however, the " tail of the pareto distribution " is the 
real challenge in information system engineering. although 80% of the process instances may be ex-
plained by 20% of the process variants, often most of the resources are put into the remaining 20% of 
process instances that deviate from the so -called "happy path s". 
in the remainder, a simple example is used to show that reality often diverges from simplistic power-
point models. the makes it far from trivial to structure real -life processes.  process miners typically 
distinguish between lasagna and spaghetti  processes. process models may be viewed as maps that 
need to be tailored towards specific questions. as such , structuring can be viewed as finding the right 
map.  wil van der aalst  / structuring behavio r or not: that is the question 
festschrift for prof. dr. dr. h.c. dr. h.c. jörg becker 2019  2 
 2 an example : purchase -to-pay  (p2p) 
to illustrate the surprising complexity of real -life processes consider the purchase -to-pay (p2p) pro-
cess found in almost any organization. p2p refers to the operational  process that cover s activities of 
requesting (requisitioning), purchasing, receiving, paying for and accounting for goods and services.  
this process is supported by enterprise a pplication s oftware  (eas) from vendors such as sap, ora-
cle, microsoft, and salesforce. at first glance , this process seems simple, and indeed m ost cases fol-
low th e so- called “happy path” depicted in figure 1.  the activities " create purchase requisition ", "cre-
ate purchase order ", "approve purchase order ", and "receive order confirmation " are executed in se-
quence. the n the  activities "receive goods " and " receive invoice" can be performed in any order fol-
lowed by activity  "pay invoice " as the final activity . 
create purchase 
requisition
create purchase 
order
approve purchase 
order
receive order 
confirmation
receive goods
 receive invoice
pay invoice
 
figure 1: purchase -to-pay (p2p) process only considering the “happy path ”. 
 
the process depicted does not reflect the many variants of the process. taking a sample of 2654 cases 
(i.e., purchase orders) and showing all the paths reveals the true complexity of the process. figure 2 
shows the so- called directly follows relation. here we can see which activities f ollow one another. the 
2654 purchase orders follow 685 unique paths. clearly, the cases follow a pareto distribution. the 
most frequent path is taken by 201 cases. t he second most frequent path is taken by 170 cases. 68% of 
the variants are unique and acco unt for  only 17% of the cases. 63% of the cases can be explained by 
8% of the variants , and 82% of the cases can be explained by 31% of the variants. hence, the distribu-
tion approximates the well- know n 80-20 distribution. note that this example is not exceptional. this 
holds for most p2p processes and also applies to similar processes that are not fully controlled by 
software.  
process mining techniques can cope with such complexities  (van der aalst, 2016) . by r emoving some 
of the infrequent paths, we can find the process model depicted in figure 3. such a model can also be wil van der aalst  / structuring behavio r or not: that is the question 
festschrift for prof. dr. dr. h.c. dr. h.c. jörg becker 2019  3 
 translated to a petri net, bpmn model, uml activity model, or epc. the model can be further simpli-
fied setting thresholds on frequencies.  
the different process variants may have very different behaviors, not only in terms of control -flow, 
but also in terms of key performance indicators (kpis). for example, a price change may add a delay 
of 4.5 days on average. infrequent paths may point to fraud. for example, orders that were paid but 
never delivered.  
 
figure 2: the real p2p process: 2654 purchase orders follow 685 unique paths.  
 
 
figure 3: a so-called c ausal net (c-net) describing the process model.  
 
3 between lasagna  and spaghetti  
the simple p2p process shows that reality may be surprising ly different from reference models and 
powerpoint diagrams. the terms lasagna and spaghetti  refer to the different types of processes. a 
simple metric is the number  of process variants (unique traces) divided by the number of cases. this wil van der aalst  / structuring behavio r or not: that is the question 
festschrift for prof. dr. dr. h.c. dr. h.c. jörg becker 2019  4 
 yields a number between zero and one . the closer to one, the more spaghetti -like the process is. the 
closer to zero, the more lasagna- like the process is. for the p2p process discussed , the metric is 
685/2654=0.2581. this is one of many way s to cha racterize  event logs and the underlying processes.  
 
figure 4: pareto type i probability density functions for various α  values.  
 
figure  4 shows the pareto type i probability density function for various values of α. the x -axis cor-
responds to the different traces (unique behaviors) sorted by frequency. the y -axis represents the rela-
tive frequency of each trace. the higher the value of α, the more uneven the distribu tion. note that the 
distribution has a "head" (left -hand part of the distribution composed of the most frequent cases) and a 
"tail" ( right -hand part of the distribution composed of the less frequent cases). the tail is often long. 
analysis may focus on the  head (e.g., when improving performance) or the tail (e.g., when dealing 
with compliance problems). this shows that the boundary between lasagna and spaghetti  is not so 
clear -cut. even  within the same process , one can find both types of behaviors.  
4 structuring = finding a suitable map  
so how does this relate to jörg's credo "structure, structure, structure"?  it is not so easy to find struc-
ture when dealing with real -life processes. however, it remains important to look at the problem from 
the right angle. one can view process models as geographic "maps" describing reality. a subway map 
looks very different fr om a bicycle map although they aim to describe the same city. what is the best 
map? this depends on the purpose. the same holds for process models. what is a good model? this 
depends on the questions it intends to answer. the large availability of event da ta allows us to seam-
lessly generate and use process models in ways we could not imagine in the 1990s. however, the chal-
lenge remains to find structure.  
process discovery techniques that start from  the actual behavior shed new  light on the suitability of 
process model notations . the re is a gap between  techniques that return formal process models (pre-
cisely describing the possible behaviors ) and techniques that return imprecise  process models (“pic-
tures” not allowing for any form of formal reasoning). howeve r, parts of a process  may be clearly 
structured, whereas other parts are not. hybrid process models have formal and informal elements, 
thereby exploiting deliberate vagueness (van der aalst et al , 2017) . one should not try to structure 
behaviors that have  no structure; otherwise, one there is the risk of overfitting the data. applications of 
process mining clearly demonstrate the advantages of being precise when possible and remaining 
“vague” when there is not enough “evidence” in the data or standard modeling constructs do not “fit ” wil van der aalst  / structuring behavio r or not: that is the question 
festschrift for prof. dr. dr. h.c. dr. h.c. jörg becker 2019  5 
 (van der aalst et al , 2017) . we envision that the next generation of commercial process mining tools 
will support such hybrid models.  
 
to conclude , i would like to congratulate jörg again with his 60th birthday ! a milestone  in a remarka-
ble career.  
references  
van der aalst , w (2016). process mining -  data science in action . springer verlag . 
van der aalst, w. , de masellis,  r., di francescomarino , c., & ghidini , c. (2017). learning hybrid 
process models from events -  process discovery without  faking confidence. bpm 2017: 59- 76. 
becker,  j., rosemann m., & von uthmann c. (2000). guidelines  of business process modeling. 
business process management 2000: 30 -49. 
becker,  j., knack stedt,  r., & pöppelbuß, j. (2009)  developing maturity models for it management. 
business & information systems engineering 1(3): 213 -222. 
becker,  j., beverungen, d., & knackstedt, r. (2010). the challenge of conceptual modeling for prod-
uct-service systems: status -quo and perspectives for reference models and modeling languages. inf. 
syst. e -business management 8(1): 33 -66. 
röglinger,  m., pöppelbuß, j., & becker, j. (2012). maturity models in b usiness pr ocess management. 
business process management journal 18(2): 328 -346. 
 