filtering toolkit: interactively filter event logs to
improve the quality of discovered models
mohammadreza fani sani1, alessandro berti1, sebastiaan j. van zelst1;2, and wil van
der aalst1;2
1process and data science chair, lehrstuhl f ¨ur informatik 9 52074 aachen, rwth aachen
university, germany
2fraunhofer gesellschaft, institute for applied information technology (fit),
sankt augustin, germany
abstract process discovery algorithms discover process models on the basis of
event data automatically. these techniques tend to consider the entire log to dis-
cover a process model. however, real-life event logs usually contain outlier be-
haviour that lead to incomprehensible, complex and inaccurate process models
where correct and/or important behaviour is undetectable. hence, removing out-
lier behaviour thanks to ﬁltering techniques is an essential step to retrieve a good
quality process model. manually ﬁltering the event log is tricky and requires a
signiﬁcant amount of time. on the other hand, some work in the past is focused
on providing a fully automatic choice of the parameters of the discovery and ﬁl-
tering algorithms; however, the attempts were not completely successful. this
demo paper describes an easy-to-use plug-in in the prom process mining frame-
work, that provides a view where several process discovery and outlier ﬁltering
algorithms can be chosen, along with their parameters, in order to ﬁnd a sweet
spot leading to a ’good’ process model. the ﬁltered log is easily accessible, and
the process model is shown inside the view, in this way the user can immediately
evaluate the quality of the chosen combination between process discovery and
ﬁltering algorithms, and is effectively assisted in the choice of the preprocessing
methodology. some commonly used metrics (ﬁtness, precision) are reported in
the view provided by the plug-in, in order to ease the evaluation of the process
model. with the options provided by our plug-in, the difﬁculties of both fully-
manual and automatic choice of the ﬁltering approach are effectively overcome.
keywords: process mining process discovery outlier detection interactive
filtering quality improvement
1 introduction
process mining bridges the gap between traditional data mining and business process
management analysis. the main subﬁelds of process mining are 1) process discovery ,
i.e, ﬁnding a descriptive model of the underlying process, 2) conformance checking , i.e,
monitoring and inspecting whether the execution of the process in reality conforms to
the corresponding designed (or discovered) reference process model, and 3) enhance-
ment , i.e, the improvement of a process model, based on the related event data. with
process mining we discover knowledge from event data, also referred to as event logs ,2 mohammadreza fani sani et al.
readily available in most modern information systems. in all these subﬁelds event logs
are used as a starting point.
process discovery algorithms extract a process model out of the event log, with the
aim to get a description of the reality. some discovery techniques like the alpha miner
[3] aim to depict as much as possible behaviour in the event log with the assumption that
all the information related to the execution of the underlying process is stored correctly.
however, real event data often contains inaccurate or corrupt behaviour that should not
be a part of the process model [9]. the infrequent behavior could be due to:
–logging errors, e.g., mistakes and the inaccuracy of measurements.
–behaviour that is rare due to the handling of exceptional situations.
both types of infrequent behaviour- we call them outliers - make most process discovery
algorithms return incomprehensible or even inaccurate process models. to reduce these
negative effects, we can beneﬁt from outlier ﬁltering algorithms that try to detect and
remove traces that contain such undesired behaviour [4]. by preprocessing event logs
using these outlier ﬁltering methods before the process discovery phase, we can improve
the quality of discovered process models [10].
process discovery is often an explorative approach. it means that we usually need to
apply different process discovery algorithms with several parameters to generate differ-
ent process models and evaluate them. to measure the quality of a model we usually use
ﬁtness ,precision andsimplicity [7]. fitness measures how much behaviour in the event
log is also described by the process model. on the other hand, precision computes how
much of behaviour, that is described by the process model, is also presented in the event
log. moreover, simplicity measures how much the process model is simple to interpret.
after discovering a process model, the end user needs to apply several unintegrated
quality metrics to measure the quality of it and get a good quality process model.
in this paper, we propose an easy-to-use interactive ﬁltering toolkit that permits
the evaluation of several process discovery algorithms and outlier ﬁltering mechanisms
simultaneously, and let the user see the discovered process model (beside its quality
measures). unlike the most common trend that just focus on the most general behavior,
we also let the users to discover a process model on infrequent behavior, to support
deviation detection applications. after ﬁnding the desired process model, the process
instances that are ﬁt/unﬁt as an output to this process model can be retrieved for further
analysis. the tool is implemented in the prom framework [2], that is currently one of the
most widely used open-source process mining platforms. using the proposed toolkit, a
good quality process model can be discovered in an easier way.
the remainder of this paper is structured as follows. in section 2, we discuss the
related work and the motivation of having our toolkit. section 3 describes the main
features that are provided in the implemented toolkit. section 4 concludes the paper
and presents some directions for extending the implementation.
2 related work and motivation
many process discovery algorithms are proposed in the literature. some of them as the
alpha miner [3], and the ilp miner [14] depict as much as possible behaviour of theinteractive filtering 3
event log in the process model. some others as the split miner [5] and the inductive
miner [11] have internal ﬁltering mechanisms to deal with outlier behaviour. for each
of these algorithms, there are different variations and settings that can be used. the
combination of different settings usually result in completely different process models.
however, according to [4] we could not have a discovery setting that always results in
the best process model. note that the best setting is usually not known and a suitable
process model should be found by several try and error attempts.
in [8–10], it is shown that by automatically removing outlier behavior in event logs,
process discovery algorithms are able to discover process models with higher quality.
moreover, [12] uses data attributes to ﬁlter out noisy behavior. the ﬁltering algorithms
proposed by research are, unfortunately, scarcely used in most of commercial process
mining tools, where only basic ﬁltering techniques are provided, such as variants, at-
tributes, paths, timeframe and performance ﬁlters. note that, the removal of outlier
behaviour is a very important step in order to get an accurate process model.
the usual process of discovering a good quality process model can be summarized
as an iterative process including the following steps (in order):
1. preprocessing the event log.
2. applying a discovery algorithm.
3. perform several analysis, with different plug-ins, on the quality of discovered pro-
cess models (ﬁtness, precision, simplicity).
the quality of values for the current iteration affects the settings of the algorithms in
the next iteration. for example, if the ﬁtness of a discovered model is high but its pre-
cision is low, we may need to consider less infrequent behaviour in the model. these
iterations will continue until the desired process model is found. all these steps wastes
a lot of time on the human side. this problem motivates us to provide a solution that
makes it possible to ﬁlter out infrequent behaviour and discover process models in an
interactive way. so, the aim is to provide a toolkit to let the user see the results of
each change in thresholds or method on the discovered process model and its quality
measures interactively.
there are few available interactive discovery plug-ins, e.g., the inductive visual
miner and the interactive data-aware heuristic miner , that are widely used to dis-
cover process models with some decorations. however, both of these tools just focus
on speciﬁc discovery techniques, without providing pre-processing features. also, these
plug-ins do not provide quality measures on the output process model.
the plug-in proposed in this paper aims to provide an holistic approach of prepro-
cessing and discovery, that is able to display in a single representation both the process
model, the choice of discovery and ﬁltering algorithms, and the quality measures. this
helps to discover a process model with suitable quality in a systematic way, by leading
the user to the best choice of discovery and ﬁltering approaches. for example, user can
see by increasing the ﬁltering threshold, the ﬁtness will be decreased and the precision
will be increased.4 mohammadreza fani sani et al.
figure 1: the screen shot of the discovered process model.
3 interactive event log filtering
we developed our toolkit in the prom framework to increase its integration with other
process mining plug-ins. this open-source toolkit is called interactive filtering3. the
input of this toolkit is an event log and the desired process model is obtained along with
a completely ﬁt/unﬁt event log. a video demo, that shows how our toolkit can help users
to ﬁnd their desired process model intractively on a real-life event log is provided4.
figure 1 shows the general view of our toolkit. in the right panel, the settings of
process discovery and outlier ﬁltering parameters can be adjusted. in the left panel, the
resulting process model are shown as a petri net. also, quality values of the discovered
process model are shown. here, we specify the options that our toolkit provides in
different aspects.
process discovery algorithms: to discover the process model, the alpha miner [3],
the inductive miner with infrequent behaviour ﬁltering [11], the ilp miner [14], and the
split miner [5] can be used.
outlier filtering: different outlier ﬁltering techniques can be applied such as com-
mon variant ﬁltering, probabilistic methods [8, 9], and sequential mining based method
[10]. there are also some other techniques that work based on different abstractions
(i.g., set, multi-set, and sequence) and frequency of them in an event log. also, the user
can decide if he/she is interested in the main stream or infrequent behaviour.
quality measures: to evaluate the quality of process models, the precision [13],
ﬁtness [1] and f-measure of process models are reported and the user can measure the
simplicity by herself. in all of these measurements the original event log is used.
in all the mentioned algorithms, the settings can be adjusted. moreover, the toolkit
is developed in a way that it could easily be extended by any other prom plug-ins. any
other process discovery algorithm that receives an event log as an input, and returns a
petri net along with an initial marking could be added to this toolkit. this is the same
for ﬁltering plug-ins when they take into account only event logs.
the plug-in is intended to be easy to use that means no detailed knowledge about
the techniques described in the outlier ﬁltering literature is required.
3the last version is accessible through svn.win.tue.nl/repos/prom/packages/
logfiltering , and a previous version is available in prom 6.9 via the package manager.
4https://youtu.be/t31slvfqd0einteractive filtering 5
4 conclusion
here, we present an interactive event log ﬁltering toolkit that enables the discovery of
a good quality process model with an easy and systematic approach. using this toolkit
that is implemented in prom, users can ﬁlter interactively infrequent behavior using
many different algorithms, and apply several process discovery algorithms. it is also
possible to focus on infrequent behaviour, this may help in understanding deviations.
finally, the toolkit can return the desired process model along with an event log con-
taining the process instances that are perfectly ﬁt according to the model (or the ones
containing deviations). we aim in future to extend this toolkit with more process dis-
covery and ﬁltering algorithms and to add this toolkit to other platforms like pm4py [6].
references
1. van der aalst, w., adriansyah, a., van dongen, b.: replaying history on process models
for conformance checking and performance analysis. wiley interdisciplinary reviews: data
mining and knowledge discovery 2(2), 182–192 (2012)
2. van der aalst, w.m.p., van dongen, b., g ¨unther, c.w., rozinat, a., verbeek, e., weijters,
t.: prom: the process mining toolkit. bpm (demos) 489(31) (2009)
3. van der aalst, w.m.p., weijters, t., maruster, l.: workﬂow mining: discovering process
models from event logs. ieee trans. knowl. data eng. 16(9), 1128–1142 (2004)
4. andrews, r., suriadi, s., ouyang, c., poppe, e.: towards event log querying for data
quality: let’s start with detecting log imperfections (2018)
5. augusto, a., conforti, r., dumas, m., la rosa, m., polyvyanyy, a.: split miner: automated
discovery of accurate and simple business process models from event logs. knowledge
and information systems pp. 1–34 (2019)
6. berti, a., van zelst, s.j., van der aalst, w.: process mining for python (pm4py): bridging
the gap between process-and data science pp. 13–16 (2019)
7. buijs, j.c., van dongen, b., van der aalst, w.m.p.: on the role of fitness, precision, gen-
eralization and simplicity in process discovery. in: otm, ” on the move to meaningful
internet systems”. pp. 305–322. springer (2012)
8. conforti, r., la rosa, m., ter hofstede, a.: filtering out infrequent behavior from business
process event logs. ieee trans. knowl. data eng. 29(2), 300–314 (2017)
9. fani sani, m., van zelst, s.j., van der aalst, w.m.p.: improving process discovery re-
sults by filtering outliers using conditional behavioural probabilities. in: business process
management bpm workshops, barcelona, spain. pp. 216–229 (2017)
10. fani sani, m., van zelst, s., van der aalst, w.m.p.: filtering outliers using sequence min-
ing. in: coopis. pp. 216–229. springer (2018)
11. leemans, s.j., fahland, d., van der aalst, w.m.p.: discovering block-structured process
models from event logs containing infrequent behaviour. in: business process manage-
ment workshops, pp. 66–78. springer international publishing (2014)
12. mannhardt, f., de leoni, m., reijers, h.a., van der aalst, w.m.p.: data-driven process
discovery-revealing conditional infrequent behavior from event logs
13. munoz-gama, j., carmona, j.: enhancing precision in process conformance: stability, con-
ﬁdence and severity. in: ieee cidm. pp. 184–191. ieee (2011)
14. van der werf, j., van dongen, b., hurkens, c., serebrenik, a.: process discovery using
integer linear programming. fundam. inform. 94(3-4), 387–412 (2009)