bipm: combining bi and process mining 
mohammad reza harati nik1,2, wil m. p. van der aalst3 and mohammadreza fani sani3 
1department of industrial m anagement, allameh tabataba’i university, tehran, iran 
2phd visitor at process and data science (pads) team at rwth aachen, germany 
3department of computer scie nce, rwth aachen, germany 
hnreza@gmail.com, {wvdaalst, fanisani}@pads.rwth-aachen.de 
keywords: process mining, business intelligence, microsoft power bi , process cubes, business analytics. 
abstract: in this paper, we introduce a custom visual for microsoft power bi that supports process mining and business 
intelligence analysis simultaneously using a single platform . this tool is called bipm , and it brings the simple, 
agile, user-friendly, and affordable solution to stud y process models over multidimensional event logs. the 
power bi environment provides many self-service bi and olap features  that can be exploited through our 
custom visual aimed at the analysis of process data. the resulting toolse t allows for accessing various input 
data sources and generating online reports and dashboard s. rather than designing and working with reports 
in the power bi service on the web, it can be possible to view them in the power bi mobile apps, and this means bipm provides a solution to have process mini ng visualizations on mobile s. therefore, bipm can 
encourage many businesses and orga nizations to do process mining analysis with business intelligence 
analytics. consequently, it yields managers and decision makers to translate discovered insights 
comprehensively to gain improved decisi ons and better performance more quickly.
1 introduction 
nowadays, process mining is a new and emerging 
interdisciplinary field between data science and 
business process management. generally, it bridges 
the gap between business process management and 
workflow management on the one hand and already between data mining, business intelligence, and 
machine learning on the ot her hand (van der aalst, 
2016). process mining can be subdivided into process 
discovery , conformance checking , and enhancement . 
in process discovery, we aim to discover a process 
model that describes the process captured within the event data. in conformance checking, deviations 
between event log and the predefined desirable 
process model are discussed, and the enhancement techniques focus on improving a process by 
enhancing the model using the corresponding event 
log, e.g., adding timestamps analysis to expose the bottlenecks and service levels (van der aalst, 
adriansyah and van dongen, 2012). 
among these approaches, process discovery plays 
a fundamental and significant role in understanding 
what occurred in reality. in other words, it helps us to 
understand how process instances were executed in 
reality. in this branch of process mining, the event log is used to distinguish “de facto models,” i.e., the 
model aims to show real executive business processes 
(van der aalst et al., 2010 ). the real sequence of 
executing activities as a process model is the valuable 
output since this yields business owners and service managers to interpreter desirable insights of hidden 
knowledge of the stored event data from various 
working information system s. moreover, there are 
different ways to show a process model. the most 
widely used type of presentation is process graph that 
simply provides interpretable process models (agrawal, 1998). 
when there are multiple attributes in the given 
dataset, and many classes of cases are available in the event log, the ability to do process mining in a 
multidimensional manner becomes more crucial. the 
business analyst needs to investigate the multiple case dimensions on the behaviors of the process. 
multidimensional process mining is related to use the 
online analytical processi ng (olap) infrastructure 
in process mining (van der aalst, 2013). therefore, it 
makes sense to integrate process mining into an 
existing business intelligence (bi) tool that is 
supporting olap technology. this integration allows 
leveraging the scalability and data preprocessing capabilities for real data science projects.  to address this issue, we implemented a process 
mining tool building upon the power bi 
infrastructure. we named the tool business 
intelligence and process mining  (bipm). bipm can 
discover process models from event logs and plot 
them understandably and also showing compliance 
diagnostics. moreover, one of the advantages of bipm is getting the power bi users and all bi experts 
more familiar with process mining analysis. bipm 
lets bi developers and general data scientists subsequently apply process mining analysis quickly, 
user-friendly and easily in th e platform that they are 
used to it. according to th e available license fees for 
process mining commercial tools such as disco and 
celonis, bipm is more affordable. it is free custom 
visual and only the probable fee might be charged for using power bi. meanwhile, regarding to the current 
license policy of microsoft, using power bi desktop 
is completely free (microsoft, 2019). 
the idea to relate process mining to olap 
analysis was introduced firstly by van der aalst (van 
der aalst, 2013) and it was realized by building the 
so-called process cube  paradigm (bolt and van der 
aalst, 2015). process cubes organize event data in the form of an olap cube to allow for discovering, 
comparing and analyzing the process models by 
applying dice and slice filtering functions on the cube (cross filtering). here, we continue this line of 
research by providing an integrated process mining 
solution with many bi feat ures analysis in a single 
platform. this is achieved by our developed custom 
visual for microsoft power bi. power bi is the 
powerful self-service bi platform for big data-centric businesses with many interactive visualizations for 
graphical figures, data mining tasks, statistical 
analyses, and geographical maps and also it has useful features such as supporting online dashboards, 
customized reports and, onl ine alerting (ferrari and 
russo, 2016). there are many options for connecting or importing different data sources into power bi, as 
long as the following constrai nts are satisfied 1) there 
is a 1 gb limit for each dataset. 2) the maximum 
number of rows when using directquery is 1 million 
rows and when not using directquery is 2 billion rows, 3) the maximum number of columns in a 
dataset should not exceed more than 16,000 columns 
(microsoft, 2019). these constraints are not limiting in most applications. 
by using bipm, business owners, business 
analysts, and managers can understand the value of process mining and come up with the improvement 
plans for reengineering the previous and ongoing 
processes or designing forerunner ones in the hope to achieve the better performance and efficiency. 2 bipm overview  
in this section, we give an overview of bipm. firstly, we will describe how the input data fields should be 
prepared and placed in the fields pane of power bi. 
after that, we illustrate some functional capabilities and available opportunities in the bipm for better 
understating of process mining analysis.  
2.1 input fields 
according to the expected a ttributes of standard event 
logs for process mining, given data logs in power bi should have these attribute fields: caseid (i.e., the 
identifier for each case), activity (i.e., activity name 
associated to events), and timestamp (i.e., the execution time of one activity regarding to the 
determined case). moreover, path threshold  and 
activity threshold  are optional fields. other event and 
process attributes such as resource, cost, lifecycle, 
etc. can be used for multidimensional analysis and to 
enrich analysis by adding further insights. an example of an event log is mentioned in table 1. 
table 1: sample rows of an example event log. 
case id activity timestamp resource customer 
type 
1142 register 11:25 system gold 
1142 analyze defect 12:50 tester3 gold 
1142 repair (simple) 13:25 solvers1 gold 
1145 register 11:44 system silver 
1142 test repair 17:12 tester1 gold 
1142 restart repair 18:15 system gold 
46 test repair 05:47 tester6 bronze 
46 inform user 06:00 system bronze 
46 archive repair 06:02 system bronze 
45 register 19:36 system gold 
45 analyze defect 19:36 tester3 gold 
45 repair (simple) 20:01 solverc2 gold 
 
to get the proper output process model, the following 
practical points are recommended to be considered in 
the power bi report designing level: 
1. the data type of “caseid” field should be 
numeric for performance reasons, but simple conversions are available. the data type of 
“timestamp” field can be the time or series of 
integers. 2. generally, caseid, activity, and timestamp 
attributes should be set as "don't summarize" to 
be considered as the row based granularity in the data input gateway for the custom visual. it can be 
done in the drop-down me nu of each field slot in 
the fields pane.
 3. the values for “path threshold” and “activity 
threshold” have to be set in the range of 1-100. 
this threshold is for determining the percentage 
of path or activity based on the unique values of case identifiers (i.e., distinct count of caseid) that 
should be participated in plotting the final output 
graph. initially, the default values of “path threshold” and “activity threshold” are 80 and 
100 respectively.  
4. for the “path threshold,” to avoid plotting disconnected output graph, even in the lowest 
value, main paths are kept in the result process 
models. 5. using "what if parameter" technique of power 
bi for “path threshold” and “activity threshold” 
(ranged 1-100 and changed it to the single value) provides the option for end users to change the 
thresholds to identify their effects on the output 
process model when th ey are working with 
dashboards interactively. if these fields are left 
empty, these settings can also be changed through 
the power bi desktop and designing mode of the 
power bi service by the “thresholds” choice in 
the "format" pane which is located on the right side of "fields" pane, below the “visualizations” 
pane.
 
by dragging all mandatory fields into the visual custom data field slots, bipm creates the process 
model in the format of the directed flow graph. the 
provided output has many user-friendly features to 
analyze interactively for better scrutinizing aspects of 
processes in a multidimensional manner. 
2.2 bipm capabilities  
in addition to the general capabilities being available within power bi and in the produced process model 
visualization, we would like to highlight some 
important features of doing process mining with bipm. all these features are illustrated using a simple 
event log containing information about repairs (the 
process mining group, math&cs department, 2016). for a better understanding of multidimensional 
analyses, we added more two fields to the event log, 
the first one is the random label of customer-cluster 
(gold, silver, and bronze) and the second one is the 
random label for repair types (normal and emergency) that both of th em are case attributes.  
2.2.1 cross filtering 
using bipm provides the opportunity to do process 
mining by applying many other visual objects which 
are available in the default visualization pane of power bi and also at microsoft appsource. 
therefore, process mining analysis along with many 
self-service bi features becomes ready to use. 
meanwhile, one of the useful capabilities is filtering the data with many other visualization dice and slice 
features. for example, figure 1 shows the process 
model in the downside, for three dices applied to visual charts related to the input given log, customer 
types=”silver,” repair types=”normal” and 
numberrepairs=0 (figure 1).  
 
figure 1: the sample dashboard that is containing the 
process model for the three di mension filtered data model 
by just clicking on the related top visual charts. 
note that, bipm not only let us apply process mining 
on filtered data based on bi features, it allows to filter 
the given data based on process mining features. for 
example, we could filter out process instances with 
that two activities are executed directly after each 
other in them. 
2.2.2 highlighting the activity and its 
related nodes 
if the process model is complicated with many 
activities, the ability to anal yze each activity with its 
following connections can be useful due to the 
complexity reduction of the process model. therefore, this is offered by bipm in the way, i.e., 
shown on the left side of figure 2. besides, by 
clicking on each node, it becomes highlighted in yellow (figure 2- the right side). this feature helps to 
focus attention. 
 
figure 2: left side:  a sample of applying activity selection. 
right side: an example of the activity highlighting. 
2.2.3 plotting the social network of the 
handover of work 
it is possible to get the social networks of resources 
when the original event log has the resource attribute. when the resource field is chosen instead of the 
activity field, the social network of the handover of 
work is created and vi sualized (figure 3). 
2.2.4 process models comparison 
the option of “visual level filters” provided for all 
custom visuals in power bi allows the user to 
compare different process models used sliced or diced data. for instance, it is possible to study the 
differences between two process models of gold and 
silver customers by setting the filter for the first bipm visual instance with the gold item and another one 
with the silver item as it is shown in figure 4. 
  
figure 3: an example of  a social network. 
 
figure 4: comparing two process models. 
2.2.5 online process monitoring 
in many industries, for decision makers, it is crucial 
to have on-line analysis instead of off-line results. for example, the number of concurrent tasks of a human 
resource could affect the performance of him/her. so 
if the number of current works of each employee could be monitored in a real-time situation could help 
managers to distribute works. 
the advantage of using power bi, let business 
owners connect their designed business dashboards to 
online streams. this type of connections allows us to 
monitor the ongoing process models of a business in 
a real-time. note that, this  feature can process mining 
more applicable.  
2.2.6 sharing process mining analysis 
after applying bipm features, users can share the corresponding designed dashboard with the fixed or 
adjustable settings to others. there are also many 
ways to export the process mining analysis. for example, users can create a pdf  file from the 
discovered process model, when using power bi 
service, the dashboard can be published on the web 
and it can be put in other we bpages as a web part, or 
export the csv file of an event log after applying 
different filtering on it. 
as it is possible to define different roles in power 
bi, we could apply various access levels for reports. 
for example, even the source of data for all reports is 
the same, the possible views of users in hr department may be different from views in the 
finance department.  
nowadays confidentiality issues are critical for 
companies. as bipm provides the service integrated 
into ms power bi, there is no need to pass data from 
various tools.  
3 complementary 
materials 
bipm was published on microsoft appsource under 
“power bi visuals” category and can be obtained via 
the following link: https://appsource.microsof t.com/product/power-bi-
visuals/wa104381928?tab=overview.  
during downloading any custom visual from 
appsource, there are some useful step-by-step 
instructions about how to import the custom visuals 
into power bi. moreover, we have prepared some 
complementary guidelines and documents to 
empower users to apply bipm successfully: 
1. there are some prerequisites to use bipm such 
as installing r packages and enabling r scripts running in power bi. these are described briefly 
at http://processm.com/powerbi-custom-visuals/ 
bipm/installing-bipm/. 2. there are some necessary  guidelines for how 
to set input data fields which are mentioned at: 
http://processm.com/powerbi-custom-visuals/ bipm/. 
3. the power bi project sample (.pbix format) 
based on repair  log scenario is also prepared and it can be downloaded from this link: https:// 
github.com/hnreza/proces sm/blob/master/proces
sm.pbix. 4. the online demo on the power bi service is 
available at: https://app.powerbi.com/ 
view?r=eyjrijoimzuyzdaymmqtyjrjnc00ytywlwfiogqtmzvmzmnmywyymwfkiiwi
dci6imm0zdayzmzlltr lytctndvizc1iytc
wltg5owm3ntvkognhyiisimmiojl9 . 
 
  
 4 conclusion 
in this paper, the capabilities and features of bipm as 
a custom visual for doing multidimensional process 
mining in microsoft power bi are introduced. this 
solution provides the opportunity to analyze complicated event logs with many classes of cases to 
distinguish hidden insights of processes in a 
multidimensional manner. bipm offers many interactive capabilities that tightly integrate bi and 
process mining functionalities.  
meanwhile, many significant features of bipm 
such as highlighting, cross-filtering, comparing, and 
creating the social network along with some useful 
capabilities of power bi were explained briefly. generally, our proposed approach, on the one hand, 
enriches bi dashboards w ith interactive and online 
process mining and on the other hand, persuades bi users to expand their toolset by inferring process 
models using bipm. 
as future work,  we aim to provide other process 
mining analysis e.g., conformance checking and 
bottleneck analysis in ms power bi.  
references 
van der aalst, w.m.p., 2016. process mining: data science 
in action . springer. heidelberg, 2nd edition. 
van der aalst, w.m.p., 2013, process cubes: slicing, 
dicing, rolling up and drill ing down event data for 
process mining. in asia-pacific conference on 
business process management  (pp. 1-22). springer, 
cham. 
van der aalst w.m.p., adri ansyah a., van dongen b., 
2012. replaying history on process models for 
conformance checking and performance analysis. wiley 
interdisciplinary reviews: data mining and 
knowledge discovery , 2(2), pp.182-192. 
van der aalst, w.m.p., van hee k.m., van der werf j.m., 
verdonk m., 2010. auditing 2. 0: using process mining 
to support tomorrow's auditor. computer , 43(3). 
agrawal, rakesh, dimitrios gunopulos, and frank 
leymann. "mining process models from workflow 
logs." international conferen ce on extending database 
technology. springer, berlin, heidelberg, 1998. 
bolt, a. and van der aalst,  w.m., 2015, multidimensional 
process mining using process cubes. in international 
conference on enterprise, business-process and 
information systems modeling  (pp. 102-116). springer, 
cham. 
ferrari, a., russo, m., 2016. introducing microsoft power 
bi. microsoft press . 
microsoft, 2019. data sources for the power bi service. 
microsoft documentation.  [online] available at: url: 
https://docs.microsoft.com/ en-us/power-bi/service-get-data [accessed 14 january 2019]. 
microsoft, 2019. go from data to insight to action with 
power bi desktop. [online] available at: https:// 
powerbi.microsoft.com/en-us /desktop/ [accessed 14 
january 2019]. 
the process mining group,  math&cs department, 
eindhoven university of technology, 2016. repair 
example. [online] av ailable at: url: www. 
processmining.org/_media/t utorial/repairexample.zip 
[accessed 14 january 2019]. 