process mining : not only bridging data and 
processes , but also industry and academia  
by prof.dr.ir. wil van der aalst  (24-9-2019)  
 
at the end of the 1990 -ties, i worked one year at the university of colorado in boulder (usa)  in the context 
of a longer sabbatical. this was the time  that i started to work on process mining. it is exciting to see that 
many of the things i envisioned at the time ended up in today's process mining tools. process mining is 
one of the rare examples where a new category of soft ware tools can be  directly linked  to university 
research. therefore, it is interesting to reflect on the relationship between industry and academia. 
experiences in process mining show that both can benefit from each other. initiatives like the celonis 
acad emic alliance are instrumental to this.  
 
starting point: bridging the gap between data and processes  
at the beginning of 1999, i wrote a research proposal with the title "process design by discovery: 
harvesting workflow knowledge from ad -hoc executions". i n the proposal, i defined process mining as 
"distilling a structured process description from a set of real executions". at the time, there were over 200 
workflow management systems that all had problems support ing the dynamism of real- life processes 
invol ving people . only highly structured and stable processes could be supported properly. therefore, 
adding flexibility to workflow systems was one of the main research topics. instead of adding more 
flexibility mechanisms, i proposed to use information about the actual process executions to infer a 
workflow model (expressed in terms of a petri net) and use  the model  to automatically improve processes 
while they are running. initially, the focus of process mining was on workflow automation. therefore, we 
often used the term "workflow mining" in the first couple of years. only later, we realized that the 
principles can be applied to any operational process in production, logistics, healthcare, learning,  
government, finance,  etc. however, at the time event data were only available in administrative or 
financial settings , i.e., the natural habitat of workflow management systems . re-reading the 20 -year- old 
research proposal "process design by discovery: harvesting workflow knowledge from ad -hoc 
executions" makes me r ealize that many of today's ideas in process mining and robotic process 
automation (rpa) have been around for quite some time.  
my main motivation to start working on process mining at the end of the 1990 -ties was my 
disappointment in the practical use of s imulation software and workflow management systems. 
simulation and workflow management have in common that they rely on humans to make process 
models. however, such models typically  describe  only  the "happy flows" and fail to capture the less 
frequent executions that generate most of the problems. at the time, many workflow management 
project s failed. t ogether  with hajo reijers  and several phd and msc students , i did a longitudinal study  
on the ef fects of workflow management systems. o nly half of all implementation projects in the study 
succeeded in taking the workflow system into operation. when usin g simulation software, the process of 
making the model was often more insightful than the actual re sults. simulations rely on too many simplifying assumptions. all these experiences show that process o rientation is important, but on e should 
connect process management  to the actual evidence recorded in databases, audit trails, etc.  
the above experiences naturally led to scientific challenges  such as discovering process models (e.g., petri 
nets) from event data. however, experts in process modeling and analysis (e.g., the petri net, concurrency, 
and model checking communities) were not interested in actual data, and experts in data analysis (e.g., 
the statistics and data mining communities) were not interested in processes. for a very long time, there 
were very few researchers working on the interplay between "data science" and "process science". th e 
situat ion changed only recently. the success of the first international conference on process mining 
(icpm)  in june 2019 in aachen  illustrates this change  (see https://icpmconference.org/2019/ ). 
 
from wfm  to bpm  to pm 
the main focus of  workflow management (wfm) in the 1990 -ties was o n automation. the ultimate goal 
was straight -through -processing (stp)  by removing process logic from applications and using wfm 
systems to fully orchestrate processes. wfm evolved into business process management (bpm) which 
had a much broader focus. in 2003, we organized the first international bpm conference in eindhoven. 
initially, the focus was still on automation and process modeling. flexible workflow systems, modeling 
notations, w orkflow verification, process model repositories, reference models, and service orientation 
were typical research topics. however, over time the focus shifted to exploiting data to improve 
processes. as a result, many  bpm papers written over the last decad e are actually process mining papers. 
this is unsurprising given the availability of event data in today's information systems.  
 
collaboration between industry and academia  
although i started working on process mining in the late 1990 -ties, it  took about 10 years for the first tools 
to become available. futura reflect was the first commercial process mining tool (2007) followed by disco 
(2009), celonis (2011), and many more. today there are over 30 commercial process -mining tools next to 
open -source tools like prom, pm4py, apromore, and rapidprom. celonis has been the most successful 
commercial process -mining tool with many larger users (e.g., siemens, bmw, edeka, uber, vodafone, 
etc.). therefore, it is interesting to mention some of the features in celonis process mining directly linked 
to research results  presented earlier : process discovery inspired by the heuristic miner (2002) and the 
fuzzy miner (2006), token -based conformance checking (2005), token animation and sliders (2006), 
process -based root cause analysis (2006), and process discovery based on the inductive miner (2013). the 
years indicate when results were first published. these features  are all included in the latest versions of 
celonis. some innovations were  adopted in less than five  years (e.g., inductive mining) while other 
innovations were  adopted more than ten years later (e.g., token -based conformance checking)  or are still 
waiting to be adopted .  
clearly, process -mining vendors can benefit directly from research. it is relativ ely easy  to build a process -
mining tool to discover a simple directly -follows graph (dfg) where the arcs show frequencies and times. 
however, more advanced features like conformance checking, better discovery techniques, prediction, 
process improvement, et c. all require expert knowledge and cannot be copied easily.  therefore, leading 
process -mining vendors will need to invest in r&d and collaborate with process mining researchers.  process -mining research and educ ation also benefit from process -mining vendor s. first of all, vendors 
provide easy -to-use tools  lowering the threshold to get started. several vendors provide an academic 
program allowing students and researchers to use the ir software freely . example s are the long -running 
academic initiative of fluxicon and the recently launched celonis snap . snap can be freely used  by 
researchers and students . next to software, process mining vendors provide interesting use  cases that 
drive new research, e.g., t he celonis academic alliance also provide s data sets and  lecture material. 
applications in an expanding number of  domains , trigger novel  research questions. enterprise -wide usage 
of process mining sets new requirements for scalability and usability. moreover, practical use cases are 
very inspiring and motivating for students.  this is important because both industry and academia need 
many well- educated process miners ready to transform processes all over the globe.  