evaluating the effectiveness of interactive process 
discovery in health care: a case study  
e. benevento1, p. m. dixit2,  m. f. sani4, d. aloini3,  and w.m.p. van der aalst4 
1 university of rome tor vergata, rome, italy  
2 eindhoven university of technology, eindhoven, the netherlands  
3 university of pisa, pisa, italy  
4 rheinisch -westfälische technische hochschule (rwth), aachen, germany  
elisabetta.benevento@students.uniroma2.eu  
abstract. this work aims at investigat ing the effectiveness and suitability of 
interactive process discovery, an innovative process mining technique, to 
model healthcare processes  in a data -driven manner . interactive process dis-
covery  allows the analyst  to interactively discover the process model , exploiting 
his domain knowledge along with the event log.  in so doing, a comparative 
evaluation against the traditional automated discovery techniques is carried out 
to assess the potential benefits that domain knowledge brings in improving both 
the qual ity and the understandability of the process model. the compar ison is 
performed by using a real dataset from an italian hospital, in collaboration with 
the medical staff . preliminary results show  that interactive process discovery 
allows to obtain a n accur ate and fully compliant with clinical guidelines process 
model with respect to the automated discovery techniques. discovering an ac-
curate and comprehensible process model is an important starting point for sub-
sequent process analysis and improvement steps , especially in complex envi-
ronments, such as healthcare.  
keywords:  interactive process discovery, business process modeling, 
healthcare, process mining.  
1 introduction and background  
thanks to the pervasive adoption of information systems within healthcare organiza-
tions and the raising amount of patient and process -data, recent research has started 
focusing on data -driven approaches for investigating patient -flows through automatic 
or semi -automatic ways. particularly, process mining (pm) has emer ged as a suitable 
approach to analyze , discover, improve and manage real processes, by extracting 
knowledge from event logs [1]. among the different pm perspectives, process dis-
covery (pd) focuses on automatically discovering process models based on the ev ent 
log, without using any apriori knowledge [1,2] .  of course, to gain significant out-
comes, the event log should contain all the necessary information. a considerable 
number of pd techniques has been  proposed by researchers for automatically discov-
ering process models [1]. the most promising  techniques  for healthcare processes are 2 
heuristic miner [3], fuzzy miner [4], split miner [5], and inductive miner  [6], as 
they can handle noisy and incomplete event log [7,8] . most of them produce formal 
models (petr i nets, transition systems, process trees, etc.) , having clear semantics. in 
addition, there are available also several commercial tools  (disco, celonis, qpr, 
processgold, etc.) to support pd . they return process models that  either have no 
formal semantics  or correspond to so -called directly -follows graphs (dfgs) that 
cannot express concurrency . these  models provide valuable insights but  cannot be 
used to  capture the casual relationships of the activities in the process  and draw relia-
ble considerations  [9]. 
pd is particularly critical for healthcare processes due to their intrinsic complexity, 
high variability and continuous evolution over time. [2,10] . specifically, case hetero-
geneity typically leads to extract extremely complex , and often incomprehensible , 
process models, i.e. the so -called “spaghetti -like models” [1,11]. besides , healthcare 
processes are highly dependent on clinicians’ experience and expertise, i.e., they are 
knowledge -intensive [12], involving  semi -structured and unstructured decision ma k-
ing. such deep  knowledge is not recorded in the event log, and, thus, it results diffi-
cult to elicit [13]. as a result, the mined models do not provide a meaningful repre-
sentation of the reality, leading to a significant interpretation challenge for healt hcare 
manager. to improve model  quality, domain experts and analysts heuristically per-
form a refinement at the end of the discovery phase . such a refinement is based on 
their knowledge , and it  has turned  out to be a time -consuming as well as  iterative task  
[14].  
recently, new interactive pd approaches have been  emerging, that allow to incor-
porate domain knowledge into the discovery of process models [13,15,16] . combin-
ing domain knowledge and process -data may improve  process modeling and lead to 
better results [17,18]. interactive  approaches are particularly useful in healthcare con-
text, where physicians typically have a deep domain knowledge, whose integration 
within the process discovery phase can provide critical advances with respect to tradi-
tional autom ated discovery techniques [13,14].  
this work aims at demonstrating  the effectiveness and suitability of interactive 
process discovery  (ipd), an innovative interactive technique  developed by dixit 
[19], to model healthcare processes. ipd allows the user (i.e., the analyst or the ex-
pert) to interactively discover the process model , exploit ing the domain knowledge 
along with the event log  (figure 1) . in so doing, a comparative evaluation against the 
existing state -of-the-art process discovery techniques  is carried out, in order to assess 
the potential benefits that domain knowledge brings in improving the quality and 
understandability of process model s. the comparison  is performed by using a real 
dataset from an italian hospital, in collaboration with medica l staff.  
the results  confirm that ipd can outperform the existing process discovery tech-
niques , providing a more accurate , comprehensible, and guideline compliant process 
model . appropriate  modeling of patient -flows may support  healthcare managers in 
taking decisions related to capacity planning, resource allocation , and for making 
necessary changes in the process of care.   
 
 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fig. 1. traditional automated process discovery  (top) and interactive process discovery  (bot-
tom) (process models  are not intended to be readable).  
2 interactive process discovery  
interactive process discovery (ipd), developed by dixit  [19], is an innovative inter-
active technique for modeling knowledge -intensive processes based on the domain 
knowledge along with the event log. in ipd, the user (i.e., the analyst/expert) has total 
control over the discovery approach, and can model the process incrementally, at the 
desired complexity level, exploiting his deep knowledge. information extra cted from 
the event log is used to guide the user in making decisions about where to place a 
specific activity within the model. to enable the interactive discovery of a process 
model, the ipd  miner  uses the synthesis rules [19,20],  which allow expand ing a min-
imal synthesized net1 by adding one transition and/or one place at a time. a brief 
description of ipd approach is reported here following (for more details see [19]). 
during the modeling phase, the user interacts with the synthesized net by applying 
arbitrarily three synthesis rules: (a) the abstraction rule, (b) the place rule and (c) the 
transition rule  [20]. all possible applications of these rules are projected on the syn-
thesized net, based both on the user interaction and on the information from th e activi-
ty log2.  
more in detail, the user selects the activity to be added into the net from the activi-
ty log. depending on the selected one, the status of the current synthesized net is up-
dated. specifically, ipd indicates to the user if the selected activity occurs before or 
after the other activities within the synthesized net. alternatively, it highlights that the 
selected activity and the others in the network never take place at the same time.  in 
so doing, ipd suggests where to place the activity, depending on the insights gained 
 
1  a synthesized net is a free -choice workflow net containing a source place, a sink place, a 
start transition, and an end transition. for more details see [19,20].  
2  an activity log is a multi -set (or bag) of sequences of activities. every sequence of activ ities 
in the activity log is called an activity trace [19].  
4 
from the activity log.  the user can decide to take assistance from the data or ignore 
the suggestion . the projected information can be based either on the eventually fol-
lows (precede s) relation or on the directly follows (precedes) relation, as desired by 
the user.  the user labels the newly -added transitions in the synthesized net with an 
activity from the activity log. if the transition does not represent an activity, it is de-
picted as a silent transition. the activity label of the new transition is pre -selected by 
the user, after which the rule is applied.  
3 case study: objective and methodology  
in this work, ipd was applied to a real case of an italian hospital to show both the 
effect iveness of the approach and its suitability in a complex and knowledge -intensive 
environment. more in detail, we carried out a comparative evaluation against auto-
mated discovery techniques, to assess the potential benefit that domain knowledge 
brings in im proving the quality of process model s. the evaluation  was performed  in 
terms of accuracy and compliance with clinical guidelines.  
the approach followed for the evaluation goes through three main steps:  (a) data 
collection and preparation, (b) model build ing, and (c)  model comparison  (as depicted 
in figure 2). 
fig. 2. comparative  evaluation approach . 
3.1 data collection and preparation  
we collected and pre -processed data of all lung cancer patients treated by the hospital 
during the years 2014 and 2015. the management of lung cancer is complex and re-
quires the integration of decisions made by practitioners from different disciplines. 
decisions are mainly based on the practitioner's deep knowledge  and expertise.  
data were mostly gathered from the hospital information systems. the initial da-
tabase consisted of 995 cases, 820 types of activities and more than 90,000 events. 
before modeling, we decided to refine the raw event log, in order to guarantee its 
quality. as a matter of fact, it is directly related to the quality and the applicability of 
results. data cleaning and preparation included: ( a) outliers and incomplete cases 
removal, ( b) low level activities aggregation, ( c) less significant activities abstraction, 
(d) activity redundancy detection.  as an example, we kept only the 21 most frequent 
5 
activities to simplify the event log, since it contained a huge amount of different and 
fine-grained activities. in so doing, we aimed at building models with a comparable 
yet meaningful number of activities.  
in the end, the refined event log consisted of 990 patient cases, 21 activities, and 
more than 14,000 events.  
3.2 model building  
firstly, w e applied ipd, as implemented in prom 6. 8, to extract the process model for 
lung cancer patients, with the collaboration of medical staff. to obtain the resulting 
model , on several occasions, we took assistance from insights of the event log gained 
via ipd (e.g., for positioning  “radiotherapy” and “nuclear medicine” within the mod-
el). on some other occasion s, we chose to ignore the information from the data, 
deeming it inadequate (e.g., for placing  the “x -ray” within the model ).  
following, among the state -of-the-art automated discovery techniques , we chose  
and applied  the inductive miner (im)  [6], as implemented in prom  6.8, and the split 
miner (sm) [5], as implemented in apromore.  as the 30 commercials tools produce 
directly -follows graphs (dfg s) [9], we also applied the directly -follows graphs 
miner, as implemented in pm4py [21] . 
as each discovery technique came with  several parameters to be tuned, we opti-
mized it by testing different parameter values , to find the best results. the optimiza-
tion was carried by using a rapid miner extension , called rapidprom , and was based 
on the f -score metric [22] to find the solution with the optimal balance between fit-
ness and precision. the f -score was computed on petri nets since the measuring tools 
work only on petri nets. conversions of the process model  in petri nets were done 
using prom’s package.  
3.3 model comparison  
we measured and compared the quality of the model produced by ipd and of the best 
configurations of the automated discovery techniques in terms of accuracy and com-
pliance with clinical guidelines.  
to evaluate the accuracy of the process model, we experimented with two well -
known metrics: fitness and precision [1], which both  range between 0 and 1. the 
higher the fitness value, the more the model can replay the log. conversely, the higher  
the precision value, the fewer behaviors  (i.e., traces) are probable  not to appear in the 
event log [1,9]. to compute fitness and precision, we resorted to the state -of-the-art 
alignment -based approaches described in [23,24]. due to the trade -off between fitness 
and precision [22,25], we used the f -score as an evalu ation metric, to take into ac-
count the ability of the model to equally fulfi ll and balance fitness and precision goals 
[21].  
to assess the compliance of the model with the aiom (italian association of 
medical oncology) guideline  [26], we carried out a qual itative analysis with the col-
laboration of medical staff. specifically, each process model was investigated from a 
“semantic point of view ” and was evaluated on the capability to respect a set of medi-
cal rules. specifically, the evaluation was based on the number of rules that were met 6 
by each process model. these medical rules were defined starting from the aiom 
clinical guidelines and formalize d by using a subset of (declare) templates. table  1 
shows  an overview and an interpretation of the templates that we considered. each 
template provides a way to specify a dependency between two different classes of 
activities (e.g., a precedence constraint  between the activities involved in the classes 
“surgery” and “medical examination”) [27]. 
table 1. templates interpretation . 
type  template interpretation based on the domain  
chain response (a,b)  r1: x-ray (b) should occur immediately after the surgery  (a) 
precedence (a,b)  
& 
not succession (b,a)  r2: invasive diagnostic examination  (b) should be preceded by radio-
logical examinations  (a) & (b) should not be followed by (a)   
r3: surgery  (b) should be preceded by invasive diagnostic examina-
tions  (a) & (b) should not be followed by (a)   
r4: surgery  (b) should be preceded by medical examinations  (a) & (b) 
should not be followed by (a)   
precedence (a,b)  
 r5: if the removal of therapeutic aid  (b) occurs, it should be preceded 
by the x -ray (a) 
init(a)  r6: the process should start with a general physical examination  (a) 
existence (2,a)  r7: lab test (a) should occur at least 2 times inside the process  
 
4 results  
table 2 reports  the results related to  the quantitative  evaluation, i.e. the accuracy 
values obtained by ipd process model and by the best configurations for the automat-
ed discovery techniques. more in detail, the table summarizes, for each discovered 
model: ( a) fitness, precision and f -score values; ( b) the best configuration parameters 
provided as input (only for the automated discovery techniques).  
table 2. quantitative  evaluation of ipd process model and the best configurations for th ree 
representative automated discovery techniques . 
pm technique  best configuration 
parameters  accuracy  
fitness  precision  f-score  
interactive process discovery  - 0.70 0.64 0.67 
automated 
discovery 
techniques  inductive miner  1.0 0.59 0.71 0.64 
split miner  0.9 & 0.0  0.81 0.61 0.69 
 dfg miner  0.2 1 0.21 0.36 
 
as shown in table 2, ipd, im, and sm miners provide similar results in terms of f -
score, unlike the dfg miner that is unable to balance fitness and precision values. 7 
note that we used the dfg model as a proxy for the models generated by commercial 
tools like celonis, disco, etc. as regards fitness a nd precision, all the techniques 
achieve different performance. specifically, the dfg miner strikes the best fitness 
with a value of 1, followed by the sm. however, the dfg miner is less precise than 
the others, allowing behaviors not recorded in the event  log. on the other hand, im 
obtains a model that is slightly less able to reproduce the different behaviors  in the log 
but more precise (with a value of 0.71). with ipd, experts could obtain a model with 
a quite high value of fitness, without penalization in precision. this is, definitely, a 
promising result in a knowledge -intensive domain such as the medical one.  
table 3 reports  the scores obtained by the  discovered process models  in terms of 
satisfied rules.   
table 3. number  of rules satisfied  by the models generated by the ipd, im, sm , and dfg 
miners. 
rules  interactive process 
discovery  inductive 
miner  split miner  dfg miner  
r1 1 0 1 0 
r2 1 0 0 0 
r3 1 0 0 0 
r4 1 0 0 0 
r5 1 1 1 0 
r6 1 0 0 0 
r7 1 0 1 1 
total value  7/7 1/7 3/7 1/7 
 
despite similar performance in term s of model accuracy, less than half of the rules 
were respected by the models generated by the im, sm, and dfg miners, unlike ipd 
model . this is due to the fact that im, sm, and dfg miners do not take th e organiza-
tional information and the domain knowledge on the treatment process into account; 
as a result, their models fail to properly keep the structure of the process in line with 
clinical guidelines.  
to better clarify this statement, let us drill down  the behavior  of each model with 
respect to rules r2 and r6. fi gures  3,4,5 & 6 show the process models produced by 
im, dfg miner, ipd, and sm  respectively . in a healthcare context, some activities 
must follow a specific order of execution (see r1 -r5 in table 3). for example, clinical 
guidelines suggest that invasive diagnostic procedures (e.g., bronchoscopy) must be 
executed immediately after radiological exams (x -ray and ct scan) and not vice -versa 
(r2), to confirm the diagnosis and evaluate the extent of the disease . yet, im , sm , 
and dfg miner models seem not to be able to capture this restrictive relationship, 
allowing also the inverse behavior  for some process instances. indeed, they use paral-
lelism or exclusive choice with loop s to represent the activities within the model . in 
such cases, the activities can take place in a different order from case to case, not 
respecting the restrictive condition ( figures 3, 4 & 6). on the other hand, in the pro-
cess model produced by ipd, invasive diagnostic procedures are directly preceded by 8 
radiological exams ( figure  5). furthermore, the lung cancer process should start with 
a general physical examination executed by the spe cialist (r6). unlike ipd, the im, 
sm, and dfg miner seem to violate this rule. specifically, in both models produced 
by im and dfg miner, the process may start with an activity other than  the general 
physical examination ( figure s 3 & 4). similarly, in the sm model, the starting activi-
ty is the lab test, rather than the general physical examination  (figure  6). on the con-
trary, the correct order is properly captured in the ipd model ( figure  5).  
these preliminary results confirm that leveraging domain knowle dge and infor-
mation recorded in the event log helps obtain ing a process model that fully complies 
with the guidelines and is comparable in accuracy to the models produced by the au-
tomated techniques . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fig. 3. petri  net for lung cancer patients generated by the inductive miner . 
fig. 4. petri net for lung cancer patients converted from the dfg miner  (note that the dfg 
miner can be seen as a representative example of the discovery technique used by commercial 
systems).  
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fig. 5. petri  net for lung cancer patients generated by  interactive process discovery . 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fig. 6. petri  net for lung cancer patients converted from the split miner . 
5 discussion and conclusions  
in this study, we demonstrate d the effectiveness and suitability of ipd [19] to model 
healthcare processes. ipd provides the analyst with a flexible way to interact with 
model construction, directly exploiting the domain knowledge along with the event 
log. prior knowledge from domain e xperts represents a valuable resource in the dis-
covery of process models, providing critical advances with respects to automated 
discovery techniques [13,19] . this is especially  true in healthcare, where physicians 
typically have deep domain knowledge, not  recorded in the event log, and, thus, diffi-
cult to elicit [14].  therefore, both the automated discovery techniques fail in produc-
ing meaningful and comprehensible process models, resulting in a significant inter-
pretation challenge for healthcare manager [19]. in contrast, ipd technique tries to 
structure the process data by using domain knowledge.  
our evaluation demonstrates that ipd can be used  to obtain  a guideline compliant 
process model, without penalizing its accuracy . specifically, ipd achieves satisfacto-
ry results in terms of model accuracy, comparable  to those of  im and sm. it also out-
performs the dfg miner. in addition, since im , sm, and dfg miner do not take the 
domain knowledge on the treatment process into account, their models fa il to properly 
keep the structure of the process in line with clinical guidelines. on the contrary, ipd 
11 
provides the ability to discover patient pathways that cover the most frequent medical 
behaviors  which are regularly encountered in clinical practice, a ccording to medical 
staff.  
from a managerial viewpoint, discovering an accurate and comprehensible process 
model is an important starting point for subsequent process analysis and improvement 
steps, especially in complex environments, such as healthcare. specifically, appropri-
ate modeling of patient -flows may help healthcare managers to identify process -
related issues (e.g., bottlenecks, process deviations, etc.)  and main decisions.   
while the initial experimental evaluation has provided satisfactorily results, in the 
future we aim at conducting  a more extensive evaluation, replicating the study in 
different healthcare contexts to test the applicability and generalizability of ipd.  
references  
1. van der aalst, w. m. p. process mining: data science in action. springer (2016).  
2. hompes, b., dixit, p.  m., & buijs, j. using process analytics to improve healthcare pro-
cesses. in d ata science for healthcare (pp. 305 -325). springer, cham (2019).  
3. weijters, a. j. m. m., & ribeiro, j. t. s. flexible heuristics miner (fhm). in ieee ssci 
201: symposium series on computational intelligence -cidm 2011: 2011 ieee symposi-
um on computational in telligence and data mining (pp. 310 –317) (2011).  
4. günther, c. w., & van der aalst, w. m. p. fuzzy mining – adaptive process simplifica-
tion based on multi -perspective metrics. lecture notes in computer science (including 
subseries lecture notes in artificial  intelligence and lecture notes in bioinformatics), 
4714, 328 –343 (2007).  
5. augusto, a., conforti, r., dumas, m., la rosa, m., & polyvyanyy, a. split miner: auto-
mated discovery of accurate and simple business process models from event logs. 
knowledge and inf ormation systems, 1 -34 (2018).  
6. leemans, s. j., fahland, d., & van der aalst, w. m. p. discovering block -structured pro-
cess models from event logs containing infrequent behaviour. in international conference 
on business process management (pp. 66-78). springer, cham (2013).  
7. mans, r. s., schonenberg, m. h., song, m., van der aalst, w. m.  p., & bakker, p. j. ap-
plication of process mining in healthcare –a case study in a dutch hospital. in international 
joint conference on biomedical engineering sys tems and technologies (pp. 425 -438). 
springer, berlin, heidelberg (2008).  
8. rojas, e., munoz -gama, j., sepúlveda, m., & capurro, d. process mining in healthcare: a 
literature review. journal of biomedical informatics, 61, 224 -236 (2016) . 
9. van der aalst, w. m.  p., de masellis, r., di francescomarino, c., & ghidini, c. learning 
hybrid process models from events. in international conference on business process man-
agement (pp. 59 -76). springer, cham (2017).  
10. rebuge,  á., & ferreira,  d. r. business process analysis i n healthcare environments: a 
methodology based on process mining. information systems, 37(2),99 -116 (2012).  
11. diamantini, c., genga, l., & potena, d. behavioral process mining for unstructured pro-
cesses. journal of intelligent information systems, 47(1), 5 –32 (2016).  
12. di ciccio, c., marrella, a., & russo, a. knowledge -intensive processes: characteristics, 
requirements and analysis of contemporary approaches. journal on data semantics, 
4(1), 29 –57 (2015).  12 
13. bottrighi, a., canensi, l., leonardi, g., montani, s., &  terenziani, p. interactive mining 
and retrieval from process traces. expert systems with applications (2018).  
14. canensi, l., leonardi, g., montani, s., & terenziani, p. multi -level interactive medical 
process mining. in conference on artificial intelligence  in medicine in europe (pp. 256 -
260). springer, cham (2017).  
15. rembert, a. j., omokpo, a., mazzoleni, p., & goodwin, r. t. process discovery using 
prior knowledge. in international conference on service -oriented computing (pp. 328 -
342). springer, berlin, he idelberg (2013).  
16. xu, x., jin, t., wei, z., & wang, j. incorporating domain knowledge into clinical goal 
discovering for clinical pathway mining. in biomedical & health informatics (bhi), 2017 
ieee embs international conference on (pp. 261 -264). (2017).  
17. dixit, p. m., buijs, j. c., van der aalst, w. m.  p., hompes, b. f. a., & buurman, j. using 
domain knowledge to enhance process mining results. in international symposium on da-
ta-driven process discovery and analysis (pp. 76 -104). springer, cham (2015).  
18. mannha rdt, f., de leoni, m., reijers, h. a., van der aalst, w. m.  p., & toussaint, p. j. 
guided process discovery –a pattern -based approach. information systems, 76, 1 -18 
(2018).  
19. dixit, p. m., verbeek, h. m. w., buijs, j. c. a. m., & van der aalst, w. m. p. inter active 
data-driven process model construction. in international conference on conceptual mod-
eling (pp. 251 -265). springer, cham (2018).  
20. desel, j., & esparza, j. free choice petri nets (vol. 40). cambridge university press 
(2005).  
21. berti, a., van zelst, s. j ., & van der aalst, w.  m. p.  (2019). process mining for python 
(pm4py): bridging the gap between process -and data science. arxiv preprint 
arxiv:1905.06169.  
22. de weerdt, j., de backer, m., vanthienen, j., & baesens, b. a robust f -measure for eval-
uating discov ered process models. in ieee symposium on computational intelligence and 
data mining (cidm -2011) (pp. 148 -155) (2011).  
23. adriansyah, a., munoz -gama, j., carmona, j., van dongen, b. f., & van der aalst, w. m. 
p. measuring precision of modeled behavior. inform ation systems and e -business man-
agement, 13(1), 37 -67 (2015).  
24. adriansyah, a., van dongen, b. f., & van der aalst, w. m. p. conformance checking us-
ing cost -based fitness analysis. in 2011 ieee 15th international enterprise distributed ob-
ject computing confe rence (pp. 55 -64). ieee (2011).  
25. sani, m. f., van zelst, s. j., & van der aalst, w. m. p. improving process discovery re-
sults by filtering outliers using conditional behavioural probabilities. in international con-
ference on business process management (pp. 216 -229). springer, cham (2017).  
26. linee guida aiom 2018. https://www.aiom.it/wp -
content/uploads/2018/11/2018_lg_aiom_polmone.pdf. last accessed 2019/04/15.  
27. maggi, f.m., bose, r.j.c., & van der aalst, w.m. p. a knowledge -based integrated ap-
proach for discovering and repairing declare maps. in international conference on ad-
vanced information systems engineering (pp.433 -448). springer, berlin, heidelberg 
(2013).  
 