see discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/341414540
data-based description of process performance in end-to-end order
processing
article    in  cirp annals - manuf acturing t echnolog y · may 2020
doi: 10.1016/ j.cirp .2020.03.013
citations
0reads
82
4 author s:
some o f the author s of this public ation ar e also w orking on these r elat ed pr ojects:
big softw are on the run (3tu .bsr) view pr oject
agile pr oduct de velopment  view pr oject
günther schuh
rwth aachen univ ersity
948 publica tions    5,336  citations    
see profile
andr eas gützlaff
rwth aachen univ ersity
24 publica tions    10 citations    
see profile
seth schmitz
rwth aachen univ ersity
5 publica tions    0 citations    
see profile
wil v an der aalst
rwth aachen univ ersity
1,248  publica tions    69,695  citations    
see profile
all c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y seth schmitz  on 21 may 2020.
the user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.cirp template  
data -based description of process performance in end -to-end order processing  
günther schuh1 (1), andreas gützlaff1, seth schmitz1, wil m.p. van der aalst2,3 
1laboratory for machine tools and production engineering (wzl) at rwth aachen university, campus -boulevard 30, 52074 aachen, germany  
2chair of process and data science at rwth aachen university, ahornstraße 55, 52074 aachen, germany  
3department of mathematics and computer science, eindhove n university of technology, p.o. box 513, 5600 mb eindhoven, the netherlands  
to master ongoing market competitiveness, manufacturing companies try to increase process efficiency through process improvements. mapping the end-
to-end order processing is particularly important, as one needs to consider all order-fulfilling core processes to evaluate process performance. however, 
today’s traditional process mapping methods such as workshops are subjective and time -consuming. therefore, process improvements are based on gut 
feeling  rather  than  facts,  leading  to high  failure  probabilities.  this  paper  presents  a process  mining  approach  that  provides  data-based  description  of 
process  performance  in order  processing  and  thus  objectively  and  effortlessly  maps  as-is  end- to-end  processes.  the  approach  is validated  with  an 
industrial case study. 
process, performance, machine learning, process mining  
1. introduction
today, manufacturing companies try to master the ongoing 
market competitiveness by increasing process efficiency. process 
efficiency measures how economical processes are executed and is 
quantified by the process performance indicators (ppi s) process 
time, process cost and process quality [1]. to increase process 
performance (pp)  through  process improvement  or process re-
engineering , pp is first described. thereby, pp is defined as how 
well the process, which consists of sub -processes and activities, 
operates  to achieve its objectives and describing pp includes the 
mapping of as -is proces ses as well as the description of ppi s [2]. in 
general, an accurate mapping of as -is processes is required to 
derive lasting potentials for pp improvements and one of the 
biggest challenges for producing companies [1,3].  
to describe the performance of the  end-to-end order processing 
(eteop) process is particularly important  for producing 
companies  to ensure sustainable competitive advantages. the 
eteop process comprises all technical -operative core processes of 
a company, which are domain -specific business  units such as sales 
or manufacturing, to complete customer orders (co) in due time 
[4]. however, up to 96% of process mapping methods are applied 
in manufacturing, taking predecessor processes such as design, or 
successor processes such as assembly not in to consideration, 
although they cover up to 70% of end -to-end process time [5].  
traditional methods  can be used for eteop process mapping but 
only with limitations:  first, mapping the process and its activities 
based on workshops or interviews  depends  highly on participants’ 
assumptions and abstractions. further, the as -is process mapping 
is time -consuming and frequently reported as the most costly 
stage. thirdly, since traditional methods are paper -based, the 
ability to capture dynamics is limited [6]. th us, the shortcomings 
are time -consuming, unsubstantiated, subjective and static pro -
cess descriptions that lead to failure probabilities of up to 70% [7].  
by contrast, studies since the 1998s show that the use of event 
logs, which are process feedback dat a already available in 
companies’ information systems, improve process mapping. 
studies show  that process mining (pm) methods using event logs are superior to traditional methods by effortless, fact -based, 
objective and dynamic process mapping and thus add ress the 
aforementioned drawbacks [6,8]. however, producing companies 
still map eteop by traditional methods or applied pm just in 
administrative or partial processes, as no methodology for pm 
exists that addresses the characteristics of eteop. therefore, this 
paper presents a methodology to describe pp in eteop by pm and 
thus supports companies by viable process improvements.  
the remainder of this paper is structured as follows: section 2 
highlights the importance of pm. in section 3, a comprehensive 
liter ature review on the state of the art is presented and the 
challenges of using pm in eteop are described. section 4 describes 
the methodology, which is applied in a german sme in section 5.  
2. importance of process mining for order processing
today, compani es understand processes usually as static, order -
independent and trivial. however, real industry data shows that 
order numbers vary within order processing and order -related 
activities are too manifold to be manually mapped, wherefore real 
processes are no t entirely known (see for instance table 1). 
further, as orders follow different sequential and parallel 
activities, which are executed at different times, the challenges 
increase [9]. thus, an approach for the data -based mapping of 
eteop constitutes a key  step to master process complexity.  
pm aims to discover, monitor and control real business 
processes (not assumed processes) by extracting knowledge from 
event logs . pm  must be distinguished from common data mining  
and machine learning disciplines by its process perspective. this 
paper focuses on process discovery  (one type of pm ) to transform 
data into a process model, which is a repre sentative visualization 
of real processes and activities. input s are event log data  that are  
collection s of related events. each event refers to at least an 
activity and a unique process instance , for example  orders in the 
given context  [8]. process d iscovery combined with replaying 
event data on the process model provide s a proven technology to 
detect bott lenecks and is especially useful in complex processes 
[10]. yet, several challenges for an application in eteop exist, 
which are discussed in the following section.  contents lists available at sciverse s ciencedirect  
cirp annals  manufacturing technology  
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cirp  
 
  
table 1  
example: domain -specific orders and activities of a german sme  
 
core process domains  o a r 
sales  
assembly  
logistics  400  
1852  
2684  27 
391  
69 66%  
11%  
8% 
o: no. of data -based orders; a: no. of data -based activities; r: ratio . 
r=no. of documented activities based on interviews
a. 
3. state of the art  
describing pp by pm has been researched in the last 19 years. 
several papers have been published, of which the most 12 relevant 
are presented in the following. especially for the production 
domain, applying pm in real manufacturing case studies has 
increas ed significantly in the last four years [10]. describing ppi s 
such as process time with pm shows that a pp improvement of up 
to 69.97% can be achieved [11]. however, several reasons for 
intensified research efforts exist for eteop.  
in eight of the papers, pm was applied in manufacturing 
processes. in other papers, pm was used to describe upstream 
processes, such as production planning [12], or downstream 
processes, such as logistics [6]. due to interactions between core 
process activ ities, however, the description of pp in partial 
processes  is not sufficient, as the sum of the optimized partial 
processes does not result in an optimum for eteop. rather, 
mapping partial processes have negative effects on eteop pp 
improvements [13].  
two  papers describe pp in the administrative processes of 
producing companies [14,15]. however, administrative processes 
are characterized by consistent fee dback data and consistent 
order -ids [16]. as the success of pm being highly dependent on 
order -ids and in eteop multiple order -ids are stored in different 
information systems, it becomes obvious that the approaches are 
not suitable [8]. instead, event correlation, which is the process to 
link events that belong to the same process instance but are 
scattered  across various information systems, must be considered, 
that does not yet exist in industrial practice. it is indicated to be an 
essential step to enable end -to-end process discovery [16].  
in four papers, ppi s are added as  additional attributes of event s 
in the event log  [6,8,11,12]. however, it is not easy to deal with 
many additional attributes. hence, current research deals with 
reducing mapping complexity by fewer attributes to make process 
models interpretable and pm applicable for industries [3]. 
therefore, data should be included based  on the desired  pp 
information and a minimum viable dataset for pm in eteop need 
to be defined.  
lastly, some papers use process knowledge for model validation 
that consequently affects the advantage of objective process 
mapping [9,15,17 –19]. by contrast, process knowledge for event 
log preparation is scarcely used , although producing industries are 
often challenged with semi -structured processes that require process expertise  for data pre -processing  [20–22]. in semi -
structured processes, activities vary according to order 
processing, wherefore filtering of incomplete activities and 
grouping of rare ac tivities is required to reduce process complexity 
[23]. literature emphasizes the importance of log pre -processing 
for the successful application of pm in a production environment 
[24]. therefore, in the following section, a new methodology is 
presented, w hich overcomes the aforementioned shortcomings of 
pp-related dataset pre -processing as well as dealing with typical 
eteop process charac teristics , such as multiple converging and 
diverging order -ids, to address the research deficit of pm 
applications in et eop.  
4. methodology for a data -based description of eteop  
the application of pm requires an appropriate methodology that 
is tailored to the objectives of the application case [15]. the 
methodology for the data -based description of pp in eteop 
consists of three major steps that can be go ne through iteratively 
(see figure  1). as no standard exist, the l* life -cycle model [8]  is 
adopted for the methodology . in the first step, the datasets for the 
eteop process are defined and event logs are extracted for each  
core process domain. the second step combines the multiple event 
logs of eteop, considering converging and diverging order 
relations. thus, the eteop process is mapped by pm and the pp is 
described for different process levels in the third step.  
the over all goal of the methodology is to apply pm to technical -
operating end -to-end processes to ensure an objective and fact -
based foundation for process improvements.  
 
4.1 extracting process -performance -related event logs  
 
the goal of the first phase, the defin ition and extraction of event 
logs, is to initialize the datasets that are required to describe pp in 
eteop and to provide them in a pre -processed form. the 
underlying hypothesis is that transferring tacit process knowledge 
of business experts about the et eop is important for domain -
specific event log extraction [25]. therefore, the eteop process 
domains must initially be identified by using generic business 
process frameworks and integrating business experts [2].  
the required data are derived for the even t logs based on mutual 
dependencies between information and data [26]. process time, 
which is the sum of the execution time s of activities and the 
transition time s in between, is the highest prioritized ppi and 
requires activity timestamps as data. thereby, it depends on the 
core process domain  and its information system  whether start 
and/or end timestamps are logged [8]. we assume that p rocess 
cost s can be  determined from  process ing time s and therefore 
requires no additional data. individual process  times are 
multiplied by cost drivers after process mapping. lastly, process 
quality is calculated based on the process model as the ratio of 
orders with process loops and total completed orders [21]. thus, 
order -ids as process instances, related activitie s as well as their 
start and/or end timestamps are consolidated for each core 
event log
order activity start end
o1akt. 93 18:38 18:48
…………ppi
core pro -
cess domainnppi
core pro -
cess domain1order activity start end
o1akt. 0110:34 -
…………akt. 11
akt. 12akt. 84
akt. 16akt. 14data -based process model
akt. 16ab
corders el1el2 eln
o1
o2
omom1 om2 omno21 o2nevent logs
o11 o12 o1ni
o22
iiextraction : defining performance -related 
event logs of core processesmerging and preparation: consolidating 
multiple event logs for the end -to-end processprocess discovery:  describing the order 
processing process performance 1 2 3
figure 1.  methodology for data -based description of process performance in end -to-end order processing.  
  
 process into a two -dimensional, column -structured table as event 
log data  (see step 1 of figure  1).  
the timeframe to extract the right amount of data must be 
contextually estima ted. thus, a representative number of high 
runner orders is defined that covers 80% of eteop orders. the 
timeframe is approximated by the sum of expected processing 
time in each core process multiplied by the number of sequential -
executed orders and a fact or f that covers orders occasionally 
need f -times longer than the expected timeframe of the domain. 
having this information, event logs are extracted for each core 
process domain whose steps have been widely explored and are 
thus not detailed here [8].  
erroneous process - and order -specific data in the event log lead 
to unreliable process results . therefore, data  cleaning is needed . a 
hierarchical filtering approach is used comprising order and 
process filtration (see section 4.2). in the order filtration, 
customer -anonymous orders, for example stock replenishment 
orders, are removed as they distort the eteop process. as further 
data cleaning, such as additional filtration to remove duplicated 
orders, to increase data integrity is not eteop -specific and alrea dy 
broadly researched , it is not detailed here [27].  
 
4.2. merging event logs for end -to-end order processing process  
 
companies often log orders in different information systems that 
need to be merged. customer relationship management ( crm ) 
systems might log co,  whereas  enterprise resource planning (erp) 
systems and/or manufacturing execution system ( mes ) log 
manufacturing and assembly orders. further, one -to-one 
(perspective i in step 2 of figure  1) or many -to-many relationships 
(perspective ii) can exist  between the orders in eteop. by 
example, one co generates one manufacturing order  or three 
manufacturing orders  generate two assembly orders . the 
underlying hypothesis is that a data relationship, for instance by 
reference number, exists between the multi ple order -ids. this is 
not considered in the previous pm approaches, as the partial 
processes focused so far have unique order -ids (see section 3). to 
merge event logs, the method of object -centric event log 
correlation developed in ref. [16] is used. ther eby, events of 
objects, which are domain -specific orders in the given context, are 
linked through object paths by existing relationships between 
databases. by doing so, multiple event logs are merged into one 
single event log, which is referred to as a minimum viable dataset 
(mvd), c ontaining one constituent order -id (1), eteop activities  
(2), start (3) and/or end timestamps  (4) as event log data in the 
above mentioned two -dimensional structure . 
the timestamp format varies across eteop and needs to be 
unifi ed for pm. in general, started and completed manufacturing 
orders  are recorded by seconds. to avoid loss of information, all 
timestamps of eteop are transformed in the format ‘dd.mm.yyy 
hh:mm:ss’. therefore, activities having either start or end 
timestamps  are enriched deterministically depending on whether 
activities’ timeframe is a period or a moment. for periods, missing 
timestamps are enriched by predecessor/ successor activities. for 
moments, both timestamps of the activity are equated. a further 
proce ss filtration removes orders which are not both started and 
completed within the extracted timeframe to reduce incomplete 
processes. by doing so, valuable event log information is retained 
to increase the process model reliability and performance -related 
aspects of the process [21].  
in practice, increasing product variants lead to unstructured 
processes that make the mapped eteop process exceedingly 
difficult to understand [24]. therefore, a two -step approach is 
applied that comprises order and process clus tering. order 
clustering uses incremental clustering to analyse process variants. 
incremental clustering creates clusters of orders according to their 
similarity of processing wherefore a percentage threshold is set by the user [24]. for process perspectiv e, processes are clustered 
using pattern abstractions that simplify processes by grouping 
directly successive activities on the desired level of granularity 
[28]. as a result, the eteop process with less causal dependencies 
is structured to increase the in terpretability of the mapped process 
and to avoid an overfitt ing process model.  
 
4.3. describing end -to-end order processing performance  
 
the pp of eteop can be described in two sub -steps. first, the 
process model is mapped using an adequate pm discovery 
algorithm. afterward, pp can be calculated based on the process 
model for the end -to-end process ( perspective a in step 3 of figure 
1), sub -processes (perspective b) and activities (perspective  c). 
a plethora of  discovery algorithm s is available  and none  
dominates all others in every situation. the selection of a suitable 
discovery algorithm  depends on the requirements and data [29].  
for the purposes  of the methodology , the  inductive miner  is 
chosen due to its robustness  and formal guarantee s [8,29] .  
in the methodology, the pp description contains two 
performance assessments. first, the pp is expressed by ppi s, but 
additional pp effects are derived from the process model, for 
instance loops or process interfaces. hence, process time that can 
be later mult iplied by costs, process model and process quality are 
described as pp. further, the objective is to describe them in a 
valuation -neutral manner, which means without subjective 
identification of process weaknesses, in order to initiate well -
founded process  improvement measures by process experts. 
however, the visualization is tool -based and should be user -
friendly to intuitively spot anomalies within eteop.   
5. application and key findings  
the described methodology has been applied to a real industry 
case in the small series machinery sector with sales, assembly , and 
logistics as identified core process domains. the previously 
mentioned table 1 describes the domain -specific event log 
characteristics of this industry case regarding the number of 
orders and a ctivities for a specific timeframe. in the following, the 
open -source pm tool ‘prom 6.8’ is used for the application. after 
the event logs from erp -system, mes and crm -system have been 
merged via the product serial number, a first log inspection shows 
276 cases, 53502 events and 876 activities after order filtration. a 
further event log preparation removes 8 cases that do not both 
start with either ‘order placement’ or ‘order request’ and end with 
‘product dispatched’ by using the ‘filter log using simple h euristic’ 
plug -in as process filtration. a subsequent pattern abstraction 
shows that several assembly activities at one assembly station can 
be grouped to a superior assembly activity wherefore 90 activities 
can be clustered to 14 activities. as a result, the final mvd contains 
268 cases, 48476 events and 850 activities that  is then used for pm.  
figure  2 shows the process model of eteop using the ‘inductive  
visual  miner ’ plug -in as the selected discovery algorithm with an 
activity threshold of 0.31 . this i mplies that all events 
corresponding to activities that occur more than 0.31 times than  
the most frequent activity, remain  in the mvd . additionally, a  path 
threshold of 0.4 was used , i.e. 60% noise filtering. the higher the 
thresholds are set, the more exc eptions in the process behaviour  
of the orders are mapped, which leads to a more unstructured 
process model. the process model visualizes the sequential 
activities of sales, assembly and logistics as well as parallel 
activities, for instance sub -assemblies, and process inefficiencies 
such as process loops.  internally, the model discovered by the 
inductive miner is converted to a petri net and the event data are 
aligned with this model to show frequencies and times, for 
instance  execution  and transition  times , to describe pp. the 
resulting  pp describes an average end -to-end process time of  
 25.67 days , from which more than three -quarter is spent in sales,  
and a process quality of 3%, which indicat es that 260 orders have 
at least one unplanned process loop.  
the end -to-end process model is compared to the pm process 
model of the assembly with an activity and path threshold of 1.0. 
the described eteop shows 12.34 longer process time by 680 
more events  within the core process domains sales and logistics.  
the results emphasize the high potential of the presented 
approach and promise significant contribution to increase pp 
when focusing eteop instead of partial processes (see section 1). 
additionally, whi le it was previously not possible to  describe pp 
due to process complexity, the approach allows  full process trans -
parency compared to traditional process mapping (see section 2).  
6. conclusion and further research  
in this paper, a methodology for a data -based description of 
eteop process performance has been presented. the 
methodology is structured in the three steps (1) extraction of 
performance -related event logs, (2) merging and preparation of 
multiple event logs and (3) process discovery for pp d escription. 
its innovation is the application of pm in end -to-end core processes 
by merging multiple domain -specific event logs. with this, pp in 
eteop can be objectively and fact -based described to derive 
appropriate conclusions for lasting process improv ement  and re-
engineering projects whose starting is as -is process mapping [1] . 
an application of the methodology to a real industry use case is 
presented that shows the eteop process model and describes its 
ppis. an investigation of pp description in parti al processes 
compared to end -to-end core processes has been undertaken.  
to further hone the methodology, several improvements can be 
investigated. first, the visualization can be improved for its 
valuation -neutral and intuitive description of pp by integra ting 
further process analysis requirements such as swim -lanes. 
further, different process discovery algorithms can be used in the 
third step, evaluated and analysed to describe pp. third , the data -
based process mapping can be expanded by participative meth ods 
to additionally map hidden activities that are not stored in 
databases.  lastly , as waste in terms  of long process times, high 
process costs and low process quality is discovered to achieve lean 
processes, the integration of other  lean production rules , such as  
identifying inventory levels,  can be further researched . 
acknowledgments  
the authors would like to thank the german research 
foundation dfg for funding this work within the cluster of 
excellence “internet of production” (project id: 390621612).  
references  
 
[1] dumas m, la rosa m, mendling j, reijers ha (2018) fundamentals of business  
process management . springer berlin heidelberg, berlin, heidelberg.  
[2] rosenberg a (2011) applying real -world bpm in an sap environment. 1st ed. 
galileo press, bonn.  
[3] malinova m, mendling j (2013) the effect of process map design quality on 
process management success . ecis 2013 completed research. 160.  [4] eversheim w, st. krumm, heuser t, st. müller (1993) process -oriented 
organization of o rder processing – a new method to meet customers demands. 
cirp annals  42(1):569 –71. 
[5] schönsleben p, weber s, koenigs s, duchi a (2017) different types of 
cooperation between the r&d and engineering departments in companies with 
a design -to-order product ion environment. cirp annals  66(1):405 –8. 
[6] knoll d, reinhart g, prüglmeier m (2019) enabling value stream mapping for 
internal logistics using multidimensional process mining. expert systems with 
applications  124:130 –42. 
[7] park s, kang ys (2016) a stu dy of process mining -based business process 
innovation. procedia computer science 91:734 –43. 
[8] van der aalst w (2016) process mining . springer berlin heidelberg  
[9] popsil m, mates v, hruska, tomas, bartik, vladimir (2013) process mining in a 
manufacturing company for predictions and planning. international journal on 
advances in software  6(3&4):  pp. 283 -297.  
[10]  garcia cds, meincheim a, faria junior er, dallagassa m r, sato dmv, carvalho  
dr, santos eap, scalabrin ee (2019) process mining techniques and applica -
tions – a systematic mapping study. exper  systems with applic a 133:260 –95. 
[11]  park j, lee d, zhu j (2014) an integrated approach for ship block manufacturing  
process performance evaluation: case from a korean shipbuilding company. 
intern journal of production economics  156:214 –22. 
[12]  er m, arsad n, astuti hm, kusumawardani rp, utami ra (2018) analysis of 
production planning in a global manufacturing company with process mining. 
jeim  31(2):317 –37. 
[13]  tsutsumi d, gyulai d, kovács a, tipary b, ueno y, nonaka y, monostori l (2018) 
toward s joint optimization of product design, process planning and production 
planning in multi -product assembly. cirp annals  67(1):441 –6. 
[14]  r'bigui h, cho c (2017) customer o rder fulfillment process  analysis with 
process mining . csai 2017 : pp. 247 –252.  
[15]  suriadi s, wynn mt, ouyang c, ter hofstede ahm, van dijk nj (2013) 
understanding process behaviours in a large insurance company in australia: 
a case study. caise 2013:  pp. 449 –464.  
[16]  li g, medeiros de carvalho r , van der aalst wmp (2018 ) configurable e vent 
correlation for process discovery from object -centric event data. ieee icws  
2018:  pp. 203 –210.  
[17]  viale p, f rydman c, pinaton j (2011 ) new methodology for modeling large scale 
manufacturing process: using process mining methods and experts' knowledg e. 
9th ieee  aiccsa  2011:  pp. 84 –89. 
[18]  park m, song m, baek th, son s, ha sj, cho sw (2015) workload and delay 
analysis in manufacturing process using process mining. ap -bpm 2015: pp. 
138 -151  
[19]  valencia -parra a, ramos -gutierrez b, varela -vaca aj, gom ez-lopez mt, bernal 
ag (2019) enabling process mining in aircraft manufactures: extracting event 
logs and discovering processes from complex data. business process 
management industry forum 2019 . bpm 2019, pp. 166 -177  
[20]  yang h, park m, c ho m, song m, ki m s (2014 ) a system architecture for 
manufacturing process analysis based on big data and process mining 
techniques. 2014 ieee international conference on big data : pp. 1024 –1029.  
[21]  rozinat a, jong ism de, gunther cw, van der aalst wmp (2009) process mi ning 
applied to the test process of wafer scanners in asml. ieee trans action on  
syst ems , man  and cybern etics . c 39(4):474 –9. 
[22]  lee s -k, kim b, huh m, cho s, park s, lee d (2013) mining transportation logs 
for understanding the after -assembly block manuf acturing process in the 
shipbuilding industry. expert systems with applications  40(1):  pp. 83–95. 
[23]  natschläger c, kossak f, lettner c, geist v, denkmayr a, käferböck b (2017) a 
practical approach for process mining in production processes.  erp future 
2016 . springe r international publishing.  pp. 87 –95. 
[24]  meincheim a, garcia cds, nievo la jc, scalabrin ee (2017 ) combining process 
mining with trace clustering: manufacturing shop floor process - an applied 
case. ieee 29th ictai  2017:  pp. 498 –505.  
[25]  van eck ml, lu x, leemans sjj, van der aalst wmp (2015) pm² a process mining 
project methodology. caise 2015:  pp. 297 –313.  
[26]  aamodt a, nygård m (1995) different roles and mutual dependencies of data, 
information, and knowledge — an ai perspect ive on their integration. data & 
knowledge engineering  16(3):191 –222.  
[27]  bose rjc, mans rs, van der aalst wmp (2013) wanna improve process mining 
results? ieee cidm 2013 : pp. 127 –134.  
[28]  bose rpjc, verbeek ehmw, van der aalst wmp (2014) discovering hie rarchical 
process models using prom. in  progress in pattern recognition, image analysis, 
computer vision, and applications . springer internat publishing : pp. 33 –48. 
[29]  jouck t, bolt a, depaire b, leoni md, van der aalst wmp (2018) an integrated 
framework  for process discovery algorithm evaluation . arxiv 2018: 
abs/1806.07222  
salesprocess loops
assembly logisticssub-assemblyend -to-end order processing (eteop) process model
activitiesfigure 2.  data -based eteop process model by a process discovery inductive miner (extract).  
 
view publication statsview publication stats