 
 
 
interview in the 2020 gartner market guide for process mining,  
research note g00733123 
 
interview w ith prof.dr.ir. wil van der aalst  
lehrstuhl für informa tik 9/process and data science  
rwth aachen university, d -52056 aachen, germany  
 
what are the main  developments you see in the process mining  market ? 
“process mining is becoming a more mainstream activity. in countries like germany and the 
netherlands,  most of the larger organizations have applied process mining. currently , there are 
over 30 process -mining  vendors, and process mining func tionality is embedded in all kinds of 
other tools related to business process management and automation.  therefore, the technology 
is accessible for any organization. w hat should improve is the scale of adoption in organizations. 
in my view,  there are too many small pilot projects.  to reap the true benefits of process mining , 
one should not look for quick wins only. process mining should be a continuous activity , and 
should not stop when “inconvenient truths” become visible. organizations that were able to lift 
process mining to the enterprise level have benefited most.  
when i started to work on process mining in the late 1990- ties, the focus was exclusively on 
process discovery. in research, we soon began  to look at other capabilities like conformance 
check ing, prediction, bottleneck analysis, and concept drift. the adoption of these ideas is still 
ongoing. although it is clear that conformance checking is an important capability, most vendors 
are still not really supporting this. it is impossible to interac tively edit a process model and see 
how the process complies. conformance checking is often reduced to a query for cases that have 
undesirable properties. this is an inferi or implementation of the principle of conformance 
checking. however, as the ten revised capabilities and the five common use cases described in 
the market guide clearly show, the process mining discipline expanded in several dimensions.  
when customers start to demand these capabilities, things will improve rapidly. ” 
which capabilities do you consider crucial for  lifting process mining to the next level?  
“i see three main capabilities that have been neglected thus far, but that are crucial for successful 
applications: (1) action- oriented process mining, (2) object -centric process mining, and (3) 
interactive process mining.  
action -oriented process mining focuses on the improvement actions triggered by the process -
mining diagnostics. how to respond when compliance problems  or bottlenecks emerge? this is 
not supported wel l and requires ad- hoc implementations not using generic process concepts. 
also, process interventions often have unintended effects that need to be monitored continuously . we rarely do a/b testing in process management  and should focus more in the interven tions  and 
their effects.  
object -centric process mining deals with the problem that process events may refer to many 
different objects, e.g., orders, items, customers, machines, rooms, containers, workers, etc. using 
classical process mining,  we are forced to pick one case identifier leading to the well -known 
convergence and divergence problems. for example, t he same event may need to be replicated,  
leading to incorrect frequencies and waiting times in process models. some vendors try to fix this 
by connecti ng different processes. however, as shown in our work on object -centric process 
mining, this is counterproductive , and there are better, more direct solutions.  
interactive process mining aims to remove the gap between modeling and mining. many 
organizations use a process -modeling tool or bpm suite and a process -mining  tool. of course, it 
is possible to save a discovered model and load it into such a modeling tool. however, this is not 
enough. users should be able to modify process models and immediately se e where reality 
deviates , or future bottlenecks may emerge.  moreover, process discovery tools should not try to 
discover things that are already known. interactive process mining is also a way to better handle 
data quality problems. if we know that things are not recorded properly, then process discovery 
techniques should incorporate this knowledge and not repeatedly generate process maps from 
scratch. ” 
how does process mining relate  to rpa, ml, and ai?  
“process mining can be seen as a form of machine learning (ml) since we learn process models 
from event data. however, process -mining  techniques are very different from mainstream ml 
approaches using neural networks, deep learning, support  vector machines, etc. the term ai is 
overhyped. on the one hand, ai is an umbrella term for anything related to data and intelligence. 
on the other hand, it is seen as something new and exciting that will solve all  problems. in reality, 
many traditional approaches (e.g., b asic statistics and regression) are relabeled into ai. 
moreover, organizations that are struggling with data quality problems (e.g., getting the 
timestamp format uniform) will not be able to apply any of this successfully.  
also, robotic process automation (rpa) has gotten a lot of attention in recent years,  and many 
organizations managed to get quick wins  using rpa . however, half of  rpa projects fail because 
of inflated expectations and a poor analysis of the work processes before trying to automate 
them. rpa can definitely benefit from process mining. this  synergy  explains why rpa vendors 
started to add process -mining capabilities (directly or through partnering with process -mining  
vendors).  
the topic of task mining is in- between process mining and rpa. i n task mining,  low-level user -
interface interactions are captured to learn typical user tasks. from a mining point -of-view, there 
is nothing new. the challenge is to capture events and add semantics. also here,  vendors are 
misusing the terms ml and ai in a n attempt to add “ magic ” to basic tasks like screen- scraping, 
text mining,  and image recognition. i noted that still a lot of manual work needs to be done. 
moreover, task mining does not solve problems related to the end- to-end processes. therefore, 
the sc ope of task mining is fairly limited.”  
what are the biggest hurdles  for the adoption of process mining ? 
“data quality and people remain the two main hurdles for widespread adoption. typically, 80% of 
the efforts and time are spent on locating, selecting, extracting, and transforming the process. 
the time needed to apply process mining is short (say 20%) once  the data are available in the 
right format . process mining often reveals data quality problems that need to be dealt with 
urgently. although these proc esses are costly and time- consuming, in the long run these 
problems need to be addressed whether process mining is used or not.  in addition, large groups of consultants, auditors, quality managers, and process owners are 
unaware of the capabilities of today ’s process min ing tools. one can still become a certified six 
sigma black belt or certified internal auditor , without being able to apply process mining. 
decision -makers are unable to see that process mining is different  from ml and ai . managers  
may b e afraid of process mining results. the increased transparency of processes may reveal 
mismanagement, inefficiencies, and compliance problems.  therefore, process mining creates 
management friction, but this is necessary to remove unnecessary friction in operational 
processes. ” 
how will the covid -19 pandemic impact process mining initiatives ? 
“long before the covid -19 pandemic, i coined the term process hygiene (ph). using this  
metaphor, i related process mining to personal hygiene. in my view, process mining should be as 
normal as personal hygiene and not require a business case. activities such as brushing your 
teeth, washing your hands after going to the toilet, and changing clothes also do not require a 
business case. similarly, organizations need to be w illing to look at the real processes at a 
detailed level, and address problems related to deviations, delays, and inconsistencies. 
objectively monitoring and analyzing key processes is important for the overall health and well -
being of an organization. act ually, not using process mining should require justification and not 
the other way around. the covid -19 pandemic shows the importance of processes, reliable 
data, and the ability to respond to completely new situations. when processes change 
dramatically, process mining still works, and decision- makers can use process mining results to 
make informed decisions. i see that currently, innovation budgets are cut. however, the pandemic 
will also fuel new digitalization initiatives, and it made people realize that reliable data and robust 
processes are critical for the survival of an organization. the problems experienced at the start of 
the pandemic exposed the gap between the boardroom ambitions and everyday reality with paper 
forms and excel spreadsheets.”  
 