 
the self -driving enterprise: to bring ai 
to your processes, start with the ems  
 
by wil van der aalst  
december 15, 2020 
when it comes to ai, the future was supposed to be now. companies like tesla, general motors, 
toyota, or honda promised years ago they would be making self- driving cars by 2020. all of them 
failed. neural networks like siri and alexa were supposed to inject  ai into our daily lives, but all they 
are able to tell us is the weather forecast or look up a recipe.  
and yet, the buzz about ai hasn’t worn off. every big company, every industry it seems, is into ai 
now. they talk about creating a digital twin of their organization, predicting future scenarios, and 
becoming an intelligent company with the help of ai. and yet, they have no tangible results to show 
for it.  
in fact, most of what is currently being branded as ai in the market and media is not ai at all, but  
rather just different versions of machine learning where systems are being trained to do a specific, 
narrow task.  
don’t get me wrong.  
ai certainly merits our research and development efforts both in academics and in software 
companies. but artificial inte lligence that can solve many broad business process problems most 
likely is still years away. that’s why i would urge companies to invest more carefully in technologies 
that deliver real results over empty promises.  
ems takes us from process insights to ac tion 
one of those technologies is an execution management system. introduced by celonis in october 
2020, the software company takes the next logical step linking process diagnostics to taking actions. 
still relying on process mining technology at its core,  the software company  acquired automation 
platform integromat  to integrate easy automation of process workflows.  
(read the first part of this series:  bringing data insights and automation together: the next big 
thing in process mining ) 
simply put: the ems couples the capabilities of process mining to detect compliance and 
performance problems with taking automatic actions to resolve them. process modelling and 
workflow automation alone both had rather limited su ccess in the past. process modelling without 
data just didn’t reflect reality, workflow automation would neither streamline nor fix a broken 
process. process mining plays a key role in connecting those two worlds to enable solid, data- based 
business decisi ons. 
how does it work?  
1. the ems platform  connects with transactional systems (erp, crm, scm, hrm/hcm, etc.) in 
real- time.  
2. execution instruments  continuously monitor and assess process performance (execution 
capacity) and identify process and compliance issues (execution gaps) and their root causes.  
3. execution applications  use machine learning to know which gaps have the biggest business 
impact and the best- in-class approach to fix them. they act by automating routine decisions 
and actions across multiple systems and, when necessary, they activate the right people to 
take action by providing next -best -action recommendations. ml -algorithms learn from the 
outcomes of each recommended action to improve future recommendations —  ultimately 
improving process performance over time.  
4. celonis studio:  the new celonis development studio allows ecosystem partners and 
customers to create execution instruments and a pps. celonis already has a number of first 
execution apps built by partners.  
what’s my take on the ems?  
i’ve said many times that process mining is not a one -time initiative, but rather an ongoing activity. if 
you stop at diagnostics, you won’t see a retur n on investment. your insights have to lead to actions. 
with the ems, celonis has found a way to bring two areas together that have long been 
disconnected: process mining and workflow automation.  
relying on smaller automation workflows to target specific p rocess problems across multiple 
systems, celonis’ ems can overcome system complexity that has created invisible bottlenecks. to be 
clear, it will never replace systems like sap or oracle. but the ems can orchestrate systems and 
people to address inefficien cies automatically and continuously. in that sense, it does lead to 
smarter execution.  a challenge celonis has to tackle in the future is to evolve the ems from being system -specific (think 
sap, oracle, etc.) to being truly domain -specific (think accounts payable, order management, etc.). 
the process mining core and automation capabilities are a powerful base to work from, but as soon 
as you connect an ems to “unchartered territory” (a system celonis hasn’t built execution 
instruments and apps for), you nee d to rebuild everything from scratch. celonis is working on a 
translation layer between the data model and the actual business logic but it will take them some 
time to do that.  
where are we going in the future?  
while celonis has certainly reached another m ilestone in their history, there’s still a lot of untapped 
potential in execution management. right now, the automated actions in the ems are mostly based 
on single instances and separate processes. you pick one perspective, one department, one outcome 
— for example, “update the payment terms to pay an invoice at the optimal moment” —  and 
execute an automated action to resolve a specific, process -related bottleneck.  
in the future, we need to look at processes in a more holistic way. processes, although we tend to 
look at them separately, are intertwined, and interdependent. a bottleneck in one process might 
have its root cause in another one. multiply this by the number of processes in a company and you 
get thousands of interdependent process issues waiting to be solved.  
in ten years’ time, we will hopefully have a new kind of intermediate storage layer, in which process 
data is stored in such a way that you can generate multiple process models that are more holistic in 
nature.  
and by then, we also might have  the first self- driving cars on the road. who knows?  
 
wil van der aalst  
distinguished humboldt professor at rwth aachen university and fraunhofer -institut für 
angewandte in formationstechnik  
prof.dr.ir. wil van der aalst is a full professor at rwth aachen university leading the process and 
data science (pads) group. he is also part -time affiliated with the fraunhofer- institut für 
angewandte informationstechnik (fit) where he leads fit’s process mining group and the 
technische universiteit eindhoven (tu/e). his research interests include process mining, petri nets, 
business process management, workflow management, process modeling, and process analysis. 
next to serving on the editorial boards of over ten scientific journals, he is also playing an advisory 
role for several companies, including fluxicon, celonis, processgold, and bright cape.  
 
