editorial
impact of covid-19 on bise research and education
wil van der aalst •oliver hinz •christof weinhardt
/c211the author(s) 2020
1 introduction
the last bise editorial board meeting took place on 8
march 2020 in potsdam and was co-located with the
international conference on wirtschaftsinformatik
(wi2020). this was just 1 week before covid-19restrictions were imposed in germany. it was, by the way,
also our ﬁrst editorial board meeting held in a hybrid
(analog and digital) mode. one day later, on march 9, theﬁrst coronavirus death in germany was reported, and on
the same day, the government of italy imposed a national
quarantine. wi 2020 was probably one of the last majorconferences to take place in 2020 in the usual (i.e., face-to-
face) form. in the weeks following our bise editorial
board meeting, universities and schools were closed andconferences were canceled or converted into online events.
the way the covid-19 pandemic was handled varied
from county to country, but it dramatically impacted everyindividual and every organization on the globe. next to the
devastating short-term effects, we believe that there willalso be longer-term effects on education and scientiﬁc
gatherings. it will permanently change the way we work,
educate, interact, and do business (the ‘‘new normal’’).therefore, in this editorial, we reﬂect on the effects of
covid-19 on bise research and education.
2 impact of covid-19 on education
in most countries, primary and secondary schools closed
temporarily. universities had to switch to online education.
this impacted children, students, parents, and teachers, andexposed the shortage of computers among the different
groups. according to unesco, the covid-19 pandemic
has interrupted classroom learning for at least 9 out of 10students worldwide, and about half of the students world-
wide have no access to online teaching (826 million
learners worldwide have no access to a computer)(unesco 2020 ). the ‘‘digital divide’’ between rich and
poor is disturbing. for higher education, the transition was
more straightforward. many universities were able to
switch to online education in just a few weeks. however,
also in higher education experiences are mixed.
on the one hand, students could study in a more ﬂexible,
self-paced manner. on the other hand, social interaction is
a crucial ingredient for studying. universities and collegecampuses are unique ecosystems where students with dif-
ferent backgrounds learn and socialize in close proximity
to each other. in some countries, the percentage of inter-national students is well over 25%. hence, there will also
be a longer-lasting economic effect on universities in some
countries.
it is to be expected that hybrid forms of teaching will
become the new norm. novel ways of combining face-to-
face and online teaching need to be explored. the
w. van der aalst ( &)
lehrstuhl fu ¨r informatik 9, rwth aachen, ahornstr. 55,
52056 aachen, germany
e-mail: wvdaalst@pads.rwth-aachen.de
o. hinz
faculty of economics and business administration, goethe
university frankfurt, theodor-w.-adorno-platz 4,
60323 frankfurt am main, germanye-mail: ohinz@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de
c. weinhardt
institute of information and systems and marketing (iism),
karlsruhe institute of technology (kit), kaiserstr. 89,76131 karlsruhe, germanye-mail: weinhardt@kit.edu
123bus inf syst eng
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-020-00666-9challenge is to become more robust when a new lockdown
occurs. a signiﬁcant hurdle for online education is the
testing of students. online proctoring is far from trivial.
how to ensure that the right person is doing the test anddoes not have access to teaching material or other sources
of information? proctoring may raise privacy concerns. for
example, student councils in the netherlands tried to stopthe use of proctorio and other online proctoring tools at
dutch universities. privacy and safety concerns are also
blocking interaction in virtual classrooms.
unsurprising, the usage of zoom, skype, cisco webex,
slack, and microsoft teams increased dramatically. inmarch 2020, the number of downloads of the video con-
ferencing system zoom increased by 728% (sloan 2020 ).
the number of daily active users of microsoft teams grewfrom 32 million in march to 75 million in april. this
reﬂects the major changes in communication in educational
settings and beyond.
3 impact of covid-19 on research and scientiﬁc
conferences
many researchers are also involved in teaching, and the
transition to online formats required additional efforts. as a
result, less time could be spent on research. although for
some academics home-ofﬁce helped to focus, for mostresearchers, group processes and feedback are crucial.
bachelor, master, and phd student supervision generally
suffered from the situation. in knoben and oerlemans(2006 ), the authors review literature on the effects of
proximity on inter-organizational collaboration. many
studies show that, the larger the distance between workers,the more difﬁcult it is to transfer knowledge and experi-
ence. of course, this also applies to research collaboration.
new ideas typically emerge through interactions, andthinking errors often only reveal themselves after presen-
tations and discussions. for some scientiﬁc projects, it also
became harder to collect data, especially in experimentalsettings and ﬁeld studies that involve human interaction. as
participants could not be invited to labs and other facilities,
several projects had to been paused for a yet undeﬁnedperiod. collecting data in observed environments or with
physio-sensors became signiﬁcantly harder or almost
impossible. interviews had to be moved to online formats.right now, it is not clear how these restrictions will affect
future scientiﬁc insights (and maybe even scientiﬁc
careers). if the current situation remains like this or willoccur more often in the future, new ways of conducting
experimental research have to be evaluated. in our last
editorial (weinhardt et al. 2020 ), we discussed the appli-
cation of citizen science in information systems research.
as many aspects of life (work, schooling, socialinteraction) moved back into the homes of citizens, this
now seems to be more current and relevant than ever
before.
most conferences have switched to online formats.
examples of scientiﬁc conferences in the ﬁeld relevant for
the bise community that made the switch include caise,
bpm, cbi, icpm, ecis, data, icsoft, pacis,amcis, bis, icde, and icis. very few were canceled or
postponed. in most cases, (short) presentations were pro-
vided online. the online format, in principle, allowed more
people to attend, but in most cases, truly active participa-
tion was reduced signiﬁcantly. most participants wouldcherry-pick selected talks and multitask while watching.
some conferences also experimented with new formats
such as 180-s video teasers of each paper. the conferenceproceedings were typically published as usual.
also, business-oriented conferences had to resort to
online formats. for example, in the process mining space,both the annual process mining camp (organized by
fluxicon) and celosphere (organized by celonis) moved to
online formats. in 2019, celosphere attracted about 1000participants (face-to-face). celosphere live had 18,000
registrants and 8600 actual attendees (april 2020). process
mining live (organized by iqpc/pex) and several otheronline process mining conferences had hundreds of par-
ticipants. this shows that the potential reach of online
events may be much higher than face-to-face events.
many organizations realized that it is relatively easy to
organize webinars and other online events (see for exam-
ple, abby expert talks and pafnow apriltalks). despitethe various successful formats, interaction is very different.
virtual conferences seem a poor substitute for face-to-face
conferences due to the lack of social interactions duringcoffee breaks, ofﬂine discussions, and breakouts sessions.
virtual coffee breaks, ‘‘snackable sessions’’, and other
ideas try to overcome the inherent limitations, but withlimited success until now. nevertheless, experiences with
online conferences might cause organizations to question
the need to send employees off on international travel,given the focus on sustainability and cutting carbon emis-
sions. like in teaching, conferences may shift to more
hybrid formats.
4 impact of covid-19 on businesses
at this time, the impact on the global economy is unclear
and may change quickly (e.g., due to the potential avail-ability of new vaccines). however, the pandemic will
accelerate some of the pre-existing trends and create new
ones. in addition, business models will have to evolve inorder to be covid-proof. online sales increased while
‘‘brick-and-mortar’’ sales decreased. according to bradley
123w. van der aalst et al.: impact of covid-19 on bise research and education, bus inf syst enget al. ( 2020 ), the gap in economic proﬁt between the top-
performing companies and other companies else has
widened dramatically. between december 2018 and may
2020, the top quintile of companies grew its total market-implied annual economic proﬁt by $335 billion, while
companies in the bottom quintile lost a $303 billion
(bradley et al. 2020 ).
the crisis also showed the vulnerability of supply
chains. when borders close, it is impossible to replenish
speciﬁc products, and it is very difﬁcult to manage the
increased demand for medicine, masks, toilet paper, etc.
hence, some countries will reconsider where to producecertain items. larger original equipment manufacturers
(oems, e.g., in the automotive industry) rely on hundreds
of tier 1 suppliers and indirectly on thousands of tier 2suppliers. due to the problems experienced, ‘‘supply chain
resilience’’ will be an important topic in the coming years.
inside organizations, there will be a redistribution of
work and streamlined decision-making processes. some
organizations were able to operate in a reasonable manner
with just a fraction of the normal personnel working. insome organizations, changes could be implemented that
would normally take years. other organizations went
bankrupt due to a lack of agility. in addition, the limits ofworking remotely have become clear. this is illustrated by
the fact that people remaining in the ofﬁce tend to do the
non-routine work normally done by others. due to all theseexperiences, ofﬁce and work life will not be the same after
covid-19 (boland et al. 2020 ).
5 scientiﬁc challenges put forward by the covid-19
pandemic
covid-19 has accelerated and will accelerate digitaliza-
tion initiatives (bradley et al. 2020 ). the importance of
operational processes and supporting information systems
has been demonstrated by the crisis. the lack of reliable
statistics and the inability to respond quickly enough at thebeginning of the pandemic provided important lessons. the
lack of reliable data and the inability to understand simple
mathematical models (e.g., the kermack–mckendrick andreed–frost epidemic models) lead to delayed political
decisions. however, the problems experienced also pose
interesting new scientiﬁc challenges.
research in each of the bise departments can con-
tribute to better handling global shocks such as the current
pandemic.
•the business process management department (jo ¨rg
becker and jan mendling). business process manage-ment (bpm) initiatives drive intentional change, but
should also cope with unintentional change. researchshould show how process models and process-aware
information systems can help to improve businessprocesses in times of radical changes. bpm can also
help to better organize health-care processes and use
the available resources in the best way possible.
•the decision analytics and data science department
(natalia kliewer and stefan lessmann ).the impor-
tance of quantitative methods, business analytics,computational logistics, and network management
was illustrated by the crisis. having the right data and
making the right decisions under time pressure requiresa proper data-science pipeline. moreover, decision
support needs to deal with ‘‘wicked problems’’ that
may have no ‘‘acceptable’’ solution.
•the digital business management and digital lead-
ership department (jens dibbern and roman beck).
the pandemic will fuel a new digitization wave.research in this department may help to successfully
realize the required digital transformation. moreover,
the pandemic may help to remove obstacles toblockchain adoption. blockchain technologies are
suited to verifying, securing, and sharing data, and
thus, ideal for managing multi-party, inter-organiza-tional, and cross-border transactions in times of
covid-19.
•the economics of information systems department
(dennis kundisch and kai lung hui). many organiza-
tions will need to reconsider their business models.
electronic markets and digital platforms in times ofcorona need to be supported by new economic theories
and methods. an evaluation of the mitigation policies
used by different governments may help to respondbetter. economic models may also be adapted to better
capture risks and resilience.
•the enterprise modeling and business ecosystems
department (dimitris karagiannis and jelena zdrav-
kovic). model-based development and the evolution
and evaluation of enterprise-wide or business ecosys-tem-wide information systems are important in times
where the context of these systems is rapidly changing.
domain-speciﬁc models, conceptual/reference model-ing, and enterprise architecture management can help to
structure future-proof information systems.
•
thehuman computer interaction and social comput-
ingdepartment (alexander ma ¨dche, stefan stieglitz,
and shirley gregor). the department deals with
research focusing on the design and use of interactivetechnologies that affect individuals, groups, organiza-
tions, communities, and networks. for sure, covid-19
is changing the way that people interact with other
people (e.g., co-workers) and information systems.
•the information systems engineering and technology
department (o ´scar pastor) the department deals with
123w. van der aalst et al.: impact of covid-19 on bise research and education, bus inf syst engdata and software engineering methods. data manage-
ment (e.g., supporting data lakes) and the ability toquickly develop software systems are vital in times of
radical change.
the above list shows that bise research can help to
better deal with the effects of covid-19. moreover, the
pandemic also provides new scientiﬁc challenges. this
offers a unique opportunity to show the relevance of bisein education and research (face-to-face or online). until
july 2020, 4 manuscripts relating to pandemics have been
submitted to bise by the community, treated by our edi-torial board with special treatment regarding process times.
two are likely to become published, thus illustrating the
eagerness and ability of our community to address con-temporary challenges.
open access this article is licensed under a creative commons
attribution 4.0 international license, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and thesource, provide a link to the creative commons licence, and indicate
if changes were made. the images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s creative commons licence, unlessindicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is notincluded in the article’s creative commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyrightholder. to view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
acknowledgments open access funding provided by projekt
deal.
reference
boland b, de smet a, palter r, sanghvi a (2020) reimagining the
ofﬁce and work life after covid-19. mckinsey & company.https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/our-
insights/reimagining-the-ofﬁce-and-work-life-after-covid-19 .
accessed 20 july 2020
bradley c, hirt m, hudson s, northcote n, smit s (2020) the great
acceleration. mckinsey & company. https://www.mckinsey.
com/business-functions/strategy-and-corporate-ﬁnance/our-insights/the-great-acceleration . accessed 20 july 2020
knoben j, oerlemans lag (2006) proximity and inter-organizational
collaboration: a literature review. int j manag rev 8(2):71–89
sloan m (2020) the 3 secrets behind zoom’s triple-digit growth.
drift blog. https://www.drift.com/blog/how-zoom-grew/ .
accessed 20 july 2020
unesco (2020) covid-19: a global crisis for teaching and
learning. ed/esc/ted/2020/01 rev.2. https://unesdoc.
unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000373233
. accessed 20 july 2020
weinhardt c, kloker s, hinz o et al (2020) citizen science in
information systems research. bus inf syst eng 62:273–277.https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-020-00663-y
123w. van der aalst et al.: impact of covid-19 on bise research and education, bus inf syst eng