icsoft 2020
proceedings of the
15th international conference on
software technologies
july 7 - 9, 2020
sponsored by
insticc - institute for systems and technologies of information, control and communication
acm in cooperation
acm sigsoft - acm special interest group on software engineering
in cooperation with
swim - ieice special interest group on software interprise modellingprocess mining as the superglue between data and process management
wil van der aalst
rwth aachen university, germany
abstract: process mining is able to reveal how people and organizations really function. often reality is very different
and less structured than expected. process discovery exposes the variability of real-life processes. confor-
mance checking is able to pinpoint and diagnose compliance problems. task mining exploits user-interaction
data to enrich traditional event data. all these different forms of process mining can and should support
robotic process automation (rpa) initiatives. process mining can be used to decide what to automate and to
monitor the cooperation between software robots, people, and traditional information systems. in the process
of deciding what to automate, the pareto principle plays an important role. often 80% of the behavior in
the event data is described by 20% of the trace variants or activities. an organization can use such insights
to ”pick its automation battles”, e.g., analyzing the economic and practical feasibility of rpa opportunities
before implementation. this paper discusses how to leverage the pareto principle in rpa and other process
automation initiatives.
brief biography
prof.dr.ir. wil van der aalst is a full professor at
rwth aachen university leading the process and
data science (pads) group. he is also part-time af-
ﬁliated with the fraunhofer-institut f ¨ur angewandte
informationstechnik (fit) where he leads fit’s pro-
cess mining group and the technische universiteit
eindhoven (tu/e). until december 2017, he was
the scientiﬁc director of the data science center
eindhoven (dsc/e) and led the architecture of in-
formation systems group at tu/e. since 2003, he
holds a part-time position at queensland university
of technology (qut). currently, he is also a distin-
guished fellow of fondazione bruno kessler (fbk)
in trento and a member of the board of governors
of tilburg university. his research interests include
process mining, petri nets, business process manage-
ment, workﬂow management, process modeling, and
process analysis. wil van der aalst has published
more than 230 journal papers, 22 books (as author
or editor), 530 refereed conference/workshop pub-
lications, and 80 book chapters. many of his pa-
pers are highly cited (he one of the most cited com-
puter scientists in the world and has an h-index of
148 according to google scholar with over 100,000
citations) and his ideas have inﬂuenced researchers,
software developers, and standardization committees
working on process support. he has been a co-chair
of many conferences including the business process
management conference, the international confer-
ence on cooperative information systems, the inter-national conference on the application and theory
of petri nets, and the ieee international conference
on services computing. he is also editor/member
of the editorial board of several journals, including
business & information systems engineering, com-
puting, distributed and parallel databases, software
and systems modeling, computer supported coop-
erative work, the international journal of business
process integration and management, the interna-
tional journal on enterprise modelling and infor-
mation systems architectures, computers in indus-
try, ieee transactions on services computing, lec-
ture notes in business information processing, and
transactions on petri nets and other models of con-
currency. he is also a member of the council for
physics and technical sciences of the royal nether-
lands academy of arts and sciences and serves on
the advisory boards of several organizations, includ-
ing fluxicon, celonis, processgold, and bright cape.
in 2012, he received the degree of doctor honoris
causa from hasselt university in belgium. he also
served as scientiﬁc director of the international lab-
oratory of process-aware information systems of
the national research university, higher school of
economics in moscow. in 2013, he was appointed
as distinguished university professor of tu/e and
was awarded an honorary guest professorship at ts-
inghua university. in 2015, he was appointed as
honorary professor at the national research univer-
sity, higher school of economics in moscow. he is
also an ifip fellow and elected member of the royalvan der aalst, w.
process mining as the superglue between data and process management.
inproceedings of the 15th international conference on software technologies (icsoft 2020) , pages 7-8
isbn: 978-989-758-443-5
copyright ©2020 by scitepress – science and technology publications, lda. all rights reserved7netherlands academy of arts and sciences (konin-
klijke nederlandse akademie van wetenschappen),
royal holland society of sciences and humanities
(koninklijke hollandsche maatschappij der weten-
schappen), and the academy of europe (academia
europaea). in 2018 he was awarded an alexander-
von-humboldt professorship, germany’s most valu-
able research award (ﬁve million euros).icsoft 2020 - 15th international conference on software technologies
8