 
 supporting decisions in production line processes  by 
combining  process mining and system dynamics  
mahsa pourbafrani1, sebastiaan j.van zelst1,2, wil m. p. van der aalst1,2, 
1 chair of process and data science, rwth aachen university, aachen, germany  
{mahsa.bafrani, s.j.v.zelst , wvdaals t}@pads.rwth -aachen.de  
2 fraunhofer institute for ap plied information technology , sankt augustin, germany  
{sebastiaan.van.zelst,  wil.v an.der.aalst}@fit.fraunhofer.de}  
abstract.  conventional production technology is static by nature , developments 
in the area of autonomous driving and communication technology enable a novel 
type of production line, i.e., dynamic production lines.  carriers of products are 
able to navigate autonomously through a production facility, allowing for several 
different “production routes”.  given such dynamic behavior , it is interesting for 
a production line manager to study in what type(s) of station(s) /resource(s)  he/she 
needs to invest  in. we can do so by analyzing  the behavior of the autonomous 
production line, to calculate what change is m ost likely boosting performance. in 
this paper, we use historical event data,  which are the actual execution of the 
process, to support the design of system dynamic models, i.e., a high -level pre-
dictive mathematical model. the purpose of our framework is to provide the pos-
sibility  for production line managers  to oversee the effects of the ch anges at the 
aggregated level  in the production line , regarding  different  performance metrics. 
at the same time, we provide the freedom in choosing the level of  detail  in de-
signing the model . the generated model is at a customized aggregated level. we 
evaluated our approach based on synthetic event logs in which we emulate the 
effect of policy changes, which we predict accordingly.  
 
keywords: process mining · performance analysis · system dynamics · pro-
duction line · simulation · what -if analysis  
1 introducti on 
in the area of modern  products in the automobile industry , e.g., e-mobility and au-
tonomous driving, production lines should be able to handle the changes as fast as pos-
sible . flexible manufacturing system proposed different approaches in order to deal 
with disturbances in the production systems [ 6]. providing  an agile platform in which 
the production line managers are able to find the points to improve the performance 
metrics is important.  at the same time, th e effects and costs of changes need to  be 
considered  carefully . production line managers  have to make the changes with a  certain 
level of  confidence regarding the possible effects before applying them. a complete 
insight  into the performance of  the production line is a requirement for a production 
line manager, prior to  evaluating the effect of changes. i n modern organizations , infor-
mation systems  are playing a substantial role  in the support of day -to-day operations .  
 these  information systems be come more and more intertwined  with production pro-
cesses. process  mining [ 1] is a collection of highly automated techniques that ai m to 
increase process knowledge  primarily based on the event data recorded in such infor-
mation. for example, process mining t echniques enable us to discover descriptive pro-
cess models, purely on the basis of the recorded information. furthermore, advanced 
techniques allow us to assess process conformity  w.r.t. a given reference model, as well 
as bottleneck identification. since the information system tracks what actually happens, 
process mining techniques allow organizations to increase overall process transparency 
as well as improved process performance.  the real running process es in an organiza-
tion, along with bottlenecks and performance metrics are a crucial step for an organi-
zation to identify  its current performance as well as  to improve their processes . further-
more, several techniques exist , that aim to increase the overall view of the process  [7, 
8]. undisputed, predicting the future behavior of a process, specifically with the aim of 
improving process performance, is of interest to many organizations.  within process 
mining, some work towards the prediction of future behavior w.r.t. performance o f the 
process is proposed [ 9]. in [11] focuses on assessing the applicability of deep learning 
techniques for short -term prediction. none of the existing techniques  provide s the free-
dom of choosing the level of detail  in prediction. however, a decision -maker in an or-
ganization is often interested in the predictio n of process performance regarding differ-
ent level s of detail, s pecifically, in production lines . current  predictive  approach es use 
extensive knowledge of the process , and, in production  lines, the large number and di-
versity of activities  make use of current  forward -looking approaches  not feasible.  in [5] 
a general framework  is proposed which can be used for scenario -based analysis  and 
prediction  at an aggregated level.  it uses system dynamics  models  based on the past 
data of the organization. using this approach the environmental variables, which in 
reality affect the performance of a process  can be included. at the same time,  despite 
the discrete event simulation techniques, the freedom in the level of detail  is provided. 
therefore, in this paper, we adopt the main approach in [ 5] and propose a general frame-
work based on process mining and system dynamics for production lines. it provides 
insight into the  current status  of the production  lines and its future  statues considering 
the upcoming c hanges.  we extend the proposed framework in [5] by adding a different 
level of detail  for the modeling. in addition , we perform a preliminary case study w.r.t. 
the applicability of the proposed frame work in future dynamic production line settings . 
the remainder of this paper is organized as follows. in section 2, we introduce back-
ground concepts. in section 3, we present our main approach. we provide an evaluation 
as a proof of concept in section 4. in section 5, related work is mentioned. section 6 
concludes our work and discusses interesting directions for future work.  
2 background  
process mining . process mining is a collection  of approaches, technique s, and tool s, 
which provides a wide range of knowledge  about the processes inside the organizations  
based on  event logs . using process mining, discovering and analyzing  the processes  
executed  in an organization  is possible  [1]. event log . past data of the execution of the 
organization’s p rocesses  provide the input for  process mining. the execu tion of an ac- 
 tivity, in the cont ext of some process instance s, identified by a unique case id at a spe-
cific timestamp by a specific resource  is referred to as an event.  for instance, an event 
in the production line is defined such as item 1 (case id) is cut ( activity ) by john (re-
source) at 10/1/2018 7:42:30 (timestamp) . there are different events related to  the dif-
ferent process instances, identified by different case ids . a set of events regarding the 
same case id form s a trace and multiple traces form the event log of the execution of 
the process. note that, typically, an event  log includes more data attributes related to 
the process, e.g., costs of an activity, account balance, customer id, etc.  
system dynamics . system dynamics is the collection of approaches, techniques, 
and tools , which is  able to present the model of complex, dynamic systems, in a struc-
tured manner. in particular, it allows us to capture the factors affecting the behavior of 
a system  [4]. within system dynamics, we use a specific modeling notation, i.e. a stock -
flow diagram that  allows us to simulate possible future behavior of a system , e.g., a 
(business) process.   stock -flow diagram . a stock -flow diagram consists of three basic 
elements, i.e., stocks, in -/out flows, and variables  [3]. a stock represents any entity that, 
in some way, is able to accumulate over time, e.g. the number of waiting items in the 
production line. an inflow increases the acc umulated entity represented by a stock, 
whereas an outflow reduces the accumulated entity. finally, any environmental factor 
that is able to influence the in -/outflow of a stock is modeled as a variable. such a 
variable is able to influence other variables  as well. furthermore, the value of a stock, 
in turn, is able to influence w.r.t. a variable.  
3 proposed framework  
general  key-performance metrics in production lines  are resource management /uti-
lization  and t hrough put time. we adopt the framework  presented  in [5] and  use the past 
execution of the process es in a production line in the form of event logs . event  logs and 
processes include  track information  on an activity level, i.e., they describe what activity 
is performed at what point in time , which  makes the modeling  complicated. in the pro-
posed  framework , as fig. 1 . shows,  we extract the major  process  components , which  
are, in a production setting, the  stations  in the production line . in the newly discovered 
process model the level of stations is detailed enough to show the flow of cars being 
produced in the production line and at the same time aggregated enough to  avoid un-
necessary details. to do so, w e extract activities  and aggregate them into one single 
activity  using [ 12]. the set of activities, which  must be performed but may happen in  
different orders extracted, observing the traces in the event logs.  
fig. 1. the proposed framework for the production line. it starts with discovering the process 
model of the product ion line at the station level. generating sd -log including the di fferent 
performance parameters, which  are used to design the model. after validation, the scenario -
based analysis for the production managers is possible . 
 
  
considering  the performance  aspect , since all the parallel activities happen in any 
possible order s, we combine them into one single high -level activity.  using  a module 
based on process discovery, the process model  at the station level  is discovered . in pro-
duction lines, the tasks are distributed  between stations, which can be handled by the 
same resources, we are able to get the performance of the process among the stations. 
we consider  the following  performance parameters exclusively in production lines: av-
erage service time in each station, num ber of resources for each station, the arrival 
rate of items for production line, finish rate, the capacity of each station, and the num-
ber of item s waiting in each station . in the next step, we generate the sd -log based on 
the performance parameters of sta tions for each time window. as shown in fig.1. the 
similarity values of parameters in each time window are tested with the “time window  
stability test”. exploiting the system dynamics modeling, the stock -flow diagram is 
being generated for the production line.  we simulate the model populating the model 
with the values from sd -log. this step is followed by a validation step, which pro vides 
the level of certainty, i.e., whether the model is acting similar to reality. in the final 
step, the general model can be re fined by adding other parameters in the production 
line. we use the model to change the parameters and predict the different sc enarios .  
4 proof of concept  
we use cpn tool s1 and prom2 to generate the event log based on the production line 
of an electric automobile company . the generated event log includes the execution of 
processes before and after applying the change s regarding performance metrics, e.g., 
the change in the number  of resources . our model includes  multiple stations, which  
cars go into each in sequence. in our designed stock -flow model  fig. 2. the assembly 
of the doors  including four other sub -activities  takes  two hours  (station 210) and there 
is always a queue for this station. by increasing t he number of resources in station 210 , 
as we expe cted the number of cars in the queue for station 210 is decreased  to zero  in 
the second execution of the model with two resources. therefore, the problem of wait-
ing cars seems to be solved . however, the proposed framework represents the effect of 
changes i n this station  on the two next stations, which  is the” window assembly”  station . 
 
fig. 2. part of the designed stock -flow diagram for the production line based on synthetic 
data of automobile company. this model is populated with the data from sd -log in the time 
window of one day  at the station level.  
 
                                                           
1 http://cpntools.org/  
2 http://www.promtools.org/  
 
 as fig. 3 . shows  the cars which are wait ing for  station 210  are decreasing at the same 
time the number of cars waiting for  station  211 is increasing. since in the production 
line all the cars after station  ”door assembly” go through ”window assembly”, we chose 
two involved stations  and all their possible performance parameters  generated from the 
aggregated process model and the event log. this evaluation as a proof of concept 
shows the effectiveness of the approach in demonstrating the effects of one change 
through the whole product ion line. we can pragmatically deduce the detailed  
knowledge of the process  and performance aspects  from an event log  in the scenario -
based analysis of processes . using the proposed approach, we are able to predict any 
further changes in the production lin e by changing one part, such as adding more re-
sources to one of the station s. as the example demonstrates,  the proposed approach is 
able to predict the consequence of changes/decision s in the process.  
fig. 3. number of cars  waiting  for station 212 and station 210 before (red) and after (blue) 
adding one resource to station 212  in 50 days.  
5 related work  
an overview of process mining and system dynamics is provided in [1] and [ 4], 
respectively.  in the field of system dynamics, different  work toward simulation and 
prediction are done.  there are different research conduct on the basis of using system 
dynamics in different contexts such as business process management, e.g. using both 
petri net models and system dynamics to develop a model f or the same situation  [2]. 
according to [13] s ystem dynamics among the simulation techniques in the manufac-
turing and business  is an effective technique, however , the used techniques did not  use 
the provided insight into the process by process mining techn iques.  in process mining, 
prediction and simulation approaches  are mainly at a detailed level and they are at the 
case level [ 10]. in [5] the possibility of addressing the aggregate level of models are 
addressed using both process mining and system dynamic . 
6 conclusion  
in this paper, the necessity  of providing a platform  to support the decision s in the 
modern production lines is discussed . establishing flexible production lines for modern 
products such as autonomous cars  is the goal  of the new  products . our framework  pro-
vides the ability to oversee the new decisions and changes for a production line to be 
agile. it employs p rocess mining techniques, specifically proces ses discovery at a 
 
 higher level  of abstraction along with  performance analysis. we use t he outcome of 
process mining techniques t o generate a n sd-log. we design the general  system dy-
namic s model based on  the discovered knowledge from process mining and related pa-
rameters in the production line.  general stock -flow d iagram for the production li ne at  
an aggregated level can be improved and changed regarding different situations. we 
evaluated our framework based on a synthetic event log, which is generated using a 
cpn model. this evaluation serves as a proof of concept showing  the effi ciency of ou r 
generated model . as future work, we focus on identifying the underlying r elationship s 
between the parameters of the production line. extending our approach in the field of 
performance analysis and resource management for the process to meet the require-
ments of the business is another practical approach .  
acknowledgments.  funded by the deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft (dfg, german 
research foundation) under germany  ́s excellence strategy – exc 2023 internet of 
production“.  
references  
1. van der aalst, w.m.p.: process mining - data science in action. springer (2016)  
2. rosenberg, z., riasanow, t., krcmar, h.: a system dynamics model for b usiness process 
change p rojects.  international conference of the system dynamics society.pp.1 –27 (2015)  
3. pruyt, e.: small system dynamics models for big issues: triple jump towards real -world 
complexity (2013)  
4. sterman, j.d.: business dynamics: systems thinking and modeling for a complex  world. 
no. hd30. 2 s7835 (2000)  
5. pourbafrani , m., van zelst, s.j., van der aalst, w.m.p. : scenario -based prediction of business 
processes using system dynamics , rhodes, greec e (2019 ) 
6. qin, jian, ying liu, and roger grosvenor.: a categorical framework of manufacturing for 
industry 4.0 and beyond. procedia cirp  52 (2016): 173 -178. 
7.  leemans, s.j.j., fahland, d., van der aalst, w.m.p.: process and deviation exploration with 
inductive visual miner. in: proceedings of the bpm demo sessions , eindhoven, netherlands, 
september 10, 2014. p. 46 (201 4) 
8. mannhardt, f., de leoni, m., reijers, h.a.: the multi-perspective process explorer. in: pro-
ceedings of the bpm demo s ession 2015 , pp. 130 –134 (2015)  
9. rozinat, a., mans, r.s., song, m., van der aalst, w.m.p.: discovering simulation models. 
inf. syst.34 (3), 305 –327 (2009)  
10. rozinat, a., wynn, m.t., van der aalst, w.m.p., ter hofstede, a.h.m., fidge, c.j.: workflow  
simulation for operational  decision support. data  knowl. 68 (9), 834 –850 (2009)  
11. tax, n., teinemaa, i., van zelst, s.j.: an interdisciplinary comparison of  sequence modeling 
methods for next-element prediction (2018)  
12. maikel leemans , wil m. p. van der aalst , mark van den brand .: hierarchical p erformance 
analysis for process mining , icssp (2018)   
13.  mohsen  jahangirian, tillal  eldabi, aisha  naseer, lampros k.stergioulas, terry young .: sim-
ulation in manufacturing and business: a r eview , european journal of operational research  
volume 203, issue 1, 16 may 2010, pages 1 -13 