connected, digitalized welding production |
secure, ubiquitous utilization of data across
process layers
samuel mann1?, jan pennekamp2, tobias brockho3, anahita farhang3,
mahsa pourbafrani3, lukas oster1, merih seran uysal3, rahul sharma1,
uwe reisgen1, klaus wehrle3, and wil van der aalst3
1welding and joining institute , rwth aachen university, germany
2communication and distributed systems , rwth aachen university, germany
3process and data science group , rwth aachen university, germany
abstract. a connected, digitalized welding production unlocks vast and
dynamic potentials: from improving state of the art welding to new busi-
ness models in production. for this reason, oering frameworks, which
are capable of addressing multiple layers of applications on the one
hand and providing means of data security and privacy for ubiquitous
dataows on the other hand, is an important step to enable the envi-
sioned advances. in this context, welding production has been introduced
from the perspective of interlaced process layers connecting information
sources across various entities. each layer has its own distinct challenges
from both a process view and a data perspective. besides, investigating
each layer promises to reveal insight into (currently unknown) process
interconnections. this approach has been substantiated by methods for
data security and privacy to draw a line between secure handling of data
and the need of trustworthy dealing with sensitive data among dierent
parties and therefore partners. in conclusion, the welding production has
to develop itself from an accumulation of local and isolated data sources
towards a secure industrial collaboration in an internet of production.
keywords: welding production ·industrie 4.0 ·internet of production ·
data security ·data privacy.
?corresponding author: phone: +49 241-8097242, email: mann@isf.rwth-aachen.de
this is a post-peer-review, pre-copyedit version of an article published in advanced
structured materials (issn: 1869-8433) and was originally submitted to the 1st in-
ternational conference on advanced joining processes { ajp 2019, october 24-25,
2019.
changes may have been made to this work since it was submitted for publication.
please cite the published version. the nal authenticated version is available online
under doi 10.1007/978-981-15-2957-3 8.
the original publication is available at www.springerlink.com .2 s. mann et al.
1 introduction
utilization of connected information sources has led to a paradigm shift in value
chains and society, especially since the beginning of digitalization, but is not
yet fully established in the industrial context. initiatives, such as \made in
china 2015" from china, \industrie 4.0" from germany, or the \industrial
internet consortium" from the usa, are recent eorts to deliberately access
and utilize information sources in industrial environments [12]. corresponding
concepts and platforms emerge therefore also in the eld of production technol-
ogy [11,24,22,25,26] and thus welding technology [23], but are dicult to imple-
ment comprehensively. practical diculties arise as soon as dierent subsystems,
competencies and parties join in a network of various information providers and
stakeholders [17]. these challenges end up in confusion of dierent time scales in
which data are acquired and required as well as in security and privacy concerns.
even though welding production is far from being fully digitalized, signicant
parts of measurable information is already available in forms of accessible data
sources in the established welding production, e.g., in digital testing or weld-
ing process data. however, these data sources lack extensive networking while
oering huge potential in improving welding production [23].
core terms of connected, digitalized production systems in the sense of in-
dustrie 4.0 are cyber-physical systems (cps) and their interactions in cyber-
physical production systems (cpps) [8,18], vertical and horizontal network-
ing [24], data analytics [11] and digital engineering [4]. these elements are
characteristic in connecting mechatronic systems to a connected infrastructure
(cps, cpps), providing information across dierent levels of industrial pro-
duction (vertical and horizontal networking), aggregating and interpreting data
(data analytics) and providing a digital representation of real production systems
(digital engineering).
in this work, potentials and methods shall be described, which utilize the net-
working of the established welding production among dierent entities. these
potentials are discussed in the context of data security and privacy to ensure
industrial application apart from secure, scientic boundary conditions. delib-
erate attention given to data security and privacy provides the prerequisite to
access extensive data sources that provide knowledge on the analyzed indus-
trial production. this approach is mandatory for research in data-driven digital
engineering. the foundation of this work lays in the understanding of welding
production as a collection of dierent interlaced process layers to resolve the
aforementioned potentials and challenges. this work does not focus on the weld-
ing process itself in the meaning of actual fusion of two workpieces since this
part has already been subject to dierent studies [23] but rather in its super-
imposed process layers, namely weld seam process layer, assembly process layer
and product process layer.secure, ubiquitous utilization of data across process layers 3
2 process overview
welding technology and its production environment should rst of all be consid-
ered in their fundamental essence - and thus as a process. the classical welding
process technology understands itself as the actual physical process of perma-
nently joining two joining partners under the inuence of pressure and/or heat.
the welding process itself, however, is dependent on the process of the work-
piece design in which the mechanical-technological requirements of the weld seam
are dened. following the welding process, the quality inspection and thus the
assurance of the previously set requirement prole are found especially in the
regulated welding production. welding production in its industrial application
is, yet, often part of a chain of other sub-processes such as machining or quality
assurance. the focus is therefore no longer on the weld seam itself, but rather
on the assembly. within an even larger distance, the welding process is part
of a product and part of the interaction between suppliers, production, service
providers and customers. current applications and concepts under the terms
internet of production [16] or industrie 4.0 often do not distinguish between
these layers although they have essential peculiarities in the context of welding
technology. the term \internet of production", in general, describes the vision
to establish an interconnected network for the production domain to utilize in-
formation across organizational borders and potentially, even across domains.
a connected digitalized welding production opens up new potential in all pro-
cess layers involved; however, continuous networking can only be achieved if all
networked parties and competencies can communicate securely and accountable.
similar advances are also pursued for other production processes (e.g., stamp-
ing [5]).
characteristic are the dierent time periods in which the respective process
layers provide information (figure 1, left). occurrences that have a signicant
inuence on the quality of the weld seam can take place in the order of millisec-
onds, while the interaction between suppliers, production and customers can
reach multiple days. the distinction between dierent time scales has a particu-
lar eect on the technical requirements of networked systems w.r.t. latency, data
volumes, and connectivity. therefore, the methods for recording the respective
processes dier considerably. nonetheless, the data processing methods can be
transferred to a large extent. each process can be described by a sequence of
dierent states that allow interpretation and ultimately process control in its
common consideration.
another representative challenge are the parties involved in the production
process (figure 1, right). the welding process itself, and thus the weld seam,
lays in the area of conict between the technical requirements of the design and
the downstream quality monitoring. as soon as the use of information across
all parties is reliably guaranteed in accordance with the idea of industrie 4.0
or an internet of production [16,23], the question of responsibility and informa-
tion security must inevitably be asked and answered. especially when company
borders are crossed as part of data exchanges, data security is a crucial aspect
to protect sensitive business expertise and to protect the company's assets [17].4 s. mann et al.
fig. 1. a visualization of the dierent process layers of welding: the three process
durations (left) range from milliseconds to days and the involved parties (right) dier
with each layer.
this paper only considers sensitive process data in the context of a welding pro-
duction process and leaves the analysis of privacy implications of the workforce
for future work.
in the following, technical potentials and methods are described for three
process layers that motivate networking across all involved parties. in addition,
however, decisive methods are presented that create the important basis for the
possibilities described above in the sense of responsibilities, data security and
data protection.
3 weld seam process layer
on the lowest level, the weld seam process itself is described. figure 2 visu-
alizes three typical process steps that evolve around the weld seam and the
essential form in which information on the substeps is available. first, the weld-
ing procedure specication (wps) provides a dened requirement prole for all
critical welding parameters (figure 2, upper bar). the wps thus denes the
mechanically technological weld seam properties and species the corresponding
parameter spaces for the welding process. this step is followed by the actual
welding process (figure 2, middle bar), which can be mapped using transient
process data. the inspection of the weld seam with regard to its mechanical and
technological properties is subsequently carried out in quality testing (figure 2,secure, ubiquitous utilization of data across process layers 5
fig. 2. the weld seam process consists of three dierent substeps: (i) the requirements
are set as part of the design, (ii) the welding process is monitored as part of the
welding, and (iii) the result is tested as part of the quality component.6 s. mann et al.
lower bar). here, an example of a digitized x-ray is shown. this approach pre-
serves the workpiece on the one hand and can store data in the form of digital
images on the other hand. all described process steps can be linked as described
in the following to gain a decisive added value. however, given that these three
process steps are often assigned to dierent operational responsibilities, the issue
of data security is already relevant for the lowest level of the production process.
3.1 applications and methods
the very basic type of data acquisition in arc welding is the transient recording of
the electrical welding parameters, such as voltage and current. those parameters
need to be measured with a high sample rate ( >50 khz) as arc welding processes
and gma welding in particular are highly dynamic processes. a gma welding
process is presented in figure 3.
fig. 3. gma-ac process droplet detachment: the topside pictures show high speed
images of the process, the bottom side pictures detail the acquired electrical signals.
as the droplet detachment happens within a very short period of time, an
evaluation of the process quality, as well as the detection of weld defects via the
electrical signals generate a high amount of time series data, which is hard to
analyze in real time. the measurement data can be acquired using an industrial
computer. other very important welding parameters are, for example, the weld-
ing speed or the contact tip to workpiece distance of the welding torch. as those
parameters are not changing rapidly, the data acquisition can be conducted with
a signicantly lower sample rate.secure, ubiquitous utilization of data across process layers 7
the example shows that for data mining in welding processes, dierent sets
of time series data, acquired with dierent sample rates need to be aggregated,
labeled, and reduced to handable sizes. one possibility of analyzing the time
series data may be the shape analysis of 3-dimensional voltage-current process
window as shown in figure 4.
fig. 4. visualization of a gma-ac welding process by plotting the process voltage
over process current. the process power is indicated by the color intensity. left: stable
process, right: unstable process, followed by weld defects.
besides, figure 4 shows a possible visualization of a gma weldment by
plotting the transient current measurements over the voltage measurements. at
the same time, the calculated process power is indicated by the color intensity.
the analysis of the time signal could be reduced by extracting features out
of the shape of the correlated voltage-current plot. this approach can give the
possibility of describing a weldment by discrete features, aggregated out of a time
series signal. the right side of figure 4 shows a weldment, which was followed
by a formation of weld defects. by performing a simple cluster analysis, critical
clusters can be identied, and the process can be quantied regarding the amount
of data points that belong to a cluster, characterized by an increased chance of
weld defects. thereby the time series measurement of a welding process, recorded
with a high sample rate, can be reduced to a simple set of quality key numbers
to characterize the process. at that point, a compliance check with the dened
wps data may already hint to undue deviations.
to evaluate the acquired electric signal data and linking it to the weld seam
quality, destructive as well as non-destructive testing is essential to generate a
valid training dataset. for the initial generation of a usable dataset, the electrical
welding data need to be linked to a quality criterion, generated by weld seam
testing. the respective approach can be destructive testing, such as cross sec-
tions, as well as non-destructive tests, such as oine ultra-sonic tests or online
eddy current sensors, etc. here, anomalies in the electrical sensor signals may8 s. mann et al.
give a hint to possible weld defects. destructive analysis can be conducted by
taking cross sections of the weld seams. automated image analysis can be used
to extract features, such as penetration depth, aspect ratio, width and curvature
of the weld seam and the heat aected zone, as illustrated in figure 5.
fig. 5. example of an automated feature extraction on a cross section. features, such
as penetration depth or weld seam width can be used for labeling welding data.
these tests are used to identify weld defects and therefore critical process
parameter elds. based on this information, labels can be generated for the clus-
ters of the acquired electrical time series data. similarly, every production step
within the process chain emits data, which can be aggregated to a superordinate
feature-based dataset, independent of the initial data types. as an aggregated
dataset of the production process has been generated, predictive algorithms can
be applied to investigate the inuence of parameter changes to the eciency of
the process chain.
3.2 data security and data privacy
the three dierent substeps of the weld seam process are expected to exchange
more information in the future. consequentially, aspects of data security arise.
this challenge is not only limited to company-internal scenarios where informa-
tion is exchanged between departments as it is especially relevant in scenarios
where substeps are outsourced to external parties, i.e., sensitive process infor-
mation has to cross company borders multiple times [17]. as the data contain
much detailed process information, external parties might obtain a deeper in-
sight into the welding process. for example, the processed material or the area
of application can be leaked. this scenario is further discussed as part of the
product process layer.
in the context of interconnecting the three substeps of a weld seam process
(design, welding, and quality), the previously described advances are alreadysecure, ubiquitous utilization of data across process layers 9
expected, based on data sharing between departments. however, concerns re-
garding accountability by the dierent departments challenge any adjustments of
the process as departments do not want to be held responsible for issues resulting
from improper data sharing or the underlying data quality. hence, mechanisms
must be in place to enable veriability of the data exchanges and data retrieval
in situations where deviations from the nal workpiece occurred. for this layer,
the requirements are less strict because usually no external parties are involved.
hence, each company internally has to agree how to implement accountability
and determine the level of security which the respective implementation has to
achieve. with such an approach in place, the weld seam process can be improved
by utilizing data from other substeps to adjust production in the current substep
accordingly without fearing blame or uncertainty in case of production errors.
following the low-level analysis of the weld seam process layer with detailed
process knowledge, the assembly process layer is analyzed in the next section to
gain insight into the impact of an iop-enabled assembly process layer.
4 assembly process layer
the second introduced layer consists of the assembly process.figure 6 describes
the workpiece ow of a corresponding assembly process over dierent depart-
ments and individual steps until the assembly is nalized. all steps are dened
according to operational departments and responsibilities with regard to their
competence limits. the ow of information follows the workpieces to the assem-
bly and is described by events. in addition to the quality optimization of the
weld seam described before, process transparency and optimization are becom-
ing increasingly important at this level. however, the challenges not only result
from recording the corresponding events and corresponding workpieces, but also
in the interfaces between the various competence limits.
4.1 applications and methods
at this process layer, data in form of event-logs is put in the spotlight. event
logs are, in their simplest form, composed of case ids (e.g., for weld seams,
workpieces), events, which describe decisive occurrences during production and
their according time stamp. this form of data opens up the door to process
mining, which may not only be applied in this process layer but even in others
due to its universal applications.
process mining is a young research eld which discovers, monitors, and
improves real processes by applying techniques utilized to extract knowledge
from so-called event logs. basically, three fundamental types of process mining
techniques exist: process discovery, conformance checking, and process enhance-
ment [2], as presented in figure 4. process discovery aims at extracting the real
process models from underlying event logs, i.e., the real behavior of the pro-
cesses is acquired, while conformance checking compares the observed behavior
obtained from the underlying event log with the behavior recognized by the10 s. mann et al.
fig. 6. the assembly process maps the workpiece ow to all departments (e.g., milling-
, forging-, welding-line and quality control) that are involved during production from
start to end.
fig. 7. overview of the three types of process mining: process discovery, conformance
checking, and process enhancement.secure, ubiquitous utilization of data across process layers 11
model. the goal of process enhancement is to improve the model at hand by ex-
posing the information gathered from the event log. discovering real processes
and checking compliance between observed and allowed behavior, process min-
ing uncovers and quanties deviations, nds root causes for process variations
and delays, and nds bottlenecks in the extracted process models. furthermore,
process mining provides the opportunity to predict process outcomes [19,20],
foresee deviations and bottlenecks, and compare processes w.r.t. various time
periods, products, and organizations. in the context of welding processes, pro-
cess mining can be applied at dierent levels by utilizing various techniques
applicable to the process layers weld seam, assembly, and product, as presented
in figure 1 before. in a weld seam process, for example, operators and welding
engineers specify the required parameters in the welding procedure specication
which typically includes various important parameters, such as material speci-
cation (e.g., wall thickness, size / diameter, yield / tensile strength, metallurgical
concerns), welding process type, welding direction, position, preheating temper-
ature, ller, polarity, and process parameters (e.g., travel direction, polarity, wire
welding transfer mode, number of passes, number of welders, and electrodes).
the required parameter studies are time consuming and revealing the relation-
ships and correlations among the input parameter values of the welding process
and the corresponding quality results is of high interest. for instance, decreasing
the lapse time between passing and lling activities, and changing the number
of passes may end up with better coating removal, aecting the overall quality
assurance positively. another example is to reveal the bottlenecks and failure of
the welding process, such as extracting the information about the circumstances
(at which input parameters' values) in which the output material suers lack
of fusion and penetration, residing out of the tolerance range specied by the
welding experts.
process mining provides methods that are capable to create an integrated
view of the welding production process based on data recorded in logs where
each recording corresponds to an event. each of these events comprises an ac-
tivity, e.g., joint preparation for workpiece a (cf. figure 6), a timestamp, e.g.,
15th february 2019, and optional resources, such as the worker involved in this
production step. furthermore, each event contains a unique case id which iden-
ties an associated case. in the context of the welding process, the assignment
of case ids might not be unique. considering figure 6, on the one hand, each of
the workpieces a and b might constitute its own unique case which spans its
production until they are welded together yielding workpiece c. thus, process
mining would reveal models based on an independence assumption on the work-
pieces, therefore possibly lacking important dependencies. on the other hand,
the id of workpiece c could be used for all events related to the workpieces a and
b introducing dependencies and relations between events which correspond to,
until the timestamp of the event, unrelated workpieces. this relation might then
distract the models from the important behavior. in this context, a hierarchical
view on the process that enables investigation on dierent levels of granularity12 s. mann et al.
(workpieces a and b as dierent cases or summarized under the id of workpiece
c) would be an interesting opportunity.
the discovered models can further be a subject of conformance checking, i.e.,
a set of techniques which assess the compliance between the behavior described
by the model and behavior comprised in the event log [3]. therefore, conformance
checking can be applied to discover deviations or anomalies of the production
process, thus contributing to its transparency and eciency.
process comparison. any important characteristic of the underlying pro-
cesses can be considered as an individual dimension for the process comparisons.
in the context of welding production processes, there are dierent aspects, such
as products, time, and resources. based on these dimensions, a welding process
cube can be built whose structure is similar to that of the online analytical
processing (olap). in a process cube, events are organized by using dierent
dimensions [1]. the cells of a process cube can be analyzed by using dierent
process mining techniques. slicing and dicing are common operations in process
cubes [1]. by slicing based on resources, the events related to a specic resource
are removed. by dicing based on resource and time, the activities associated
with a specic resource in the particular duration are ltered. using correlation
methods in dierent slices and dices allows companies to nd correlations be-
tween the workload and performance. the comparison of these correlations in
dierent slices and dices can provide benecial information for process owners
and engineers. this approach enables investigations of the eect of the workload
on production performance of a specic user and also investigations of the im-
pact of the workload on the performance of all users. this investigation can be
performed in dierent slices or dices of the cube, depending on the focus.
moreover, process mining may provide tools for detecting and monitoring
changes in the assembly process termed concept drift. aside from concept drift
detection on the control ow level [6,14], process specic attributes can also be
incorporated [10] to gain insight into the assembly process development exploit-
ing welding specic domain knowledge. this may further be a starting point for
a following analysis, e.g., regarding causality detection or inter-process/intra-
process comparison.
4.2 data security and data privacy
the eld of responsible data science is concerned with the dierent issues re-
garding publishing, accessing, and using data in data science techniques. process
mining as a set of techniques that directly deals with the data of the organiza-
tions should also address these concerns. the information on the level of events
including the resource information should be secured in a way that only responsi-
ble people would be able to access and perform analysis while preserving security
and privacy issues. recently, a general framework has been proposed [21] which
ensures condentiality in process mining techniques. in production processes,
dierent stakeholders and levels of the event information, e.g., human resources
working on the production processes, machines and sensors, exist.secure, ubiquitous utilization of data across process layers 13
fig. 8. the framework for condentiality in process mining protects sensitive informa-
tion during the analysis [21].14 s. mann et al.
the framework shown in figure 8 provides the condentiality in process min-
ing techniques, especially in the context of our focus, i.e., production process.
this framework can be customized in the production process context. two (in-
ternal and external) condentiality solutions along with three dierent environ-
ments, namely the forbidden, internal and external environment, exist. there-
fore, event logs can be transformed using the abstraction technique. moreover,
based on the dierent users in dierent environments either of the internal and
external condentiality solutions can be used.
regardless of such a solution, all involved parties can also agree to collabora-
tively analyze the process. unfortunately, sharing their process data can reveal
a lot of inside information with other stakeholders. however, given that the dif-
ferent parties are (at least partially) in existing business relationships, a certain
level of trust is already established. as an alternative, they can also appoint a
trusted third party to conduct the analysis for them. from a security perspec-
tive, both of these approaches introduce at least a single point which has access
to all data, i.e., a valuable target for data theft. hence, process mining solutions
which provide condentiality are more benecial in this context. analyzing the
process data without exchanging it is not a realistic option as most advances can
only be achieved by collaboration between the dierent entities of the assembly
process. otherwise, changes to the process can only be implemented locally with
a limited impact on the overall assembly layer.
similar to the weld seam layer, the assembly layer also deals with internal
departments in most cases. while an outsourcing of substeps to external parties
is a potential future development for these two layers, it is already a reality in
the context of the overall product process. consequentially, as a next step we
analyze this layer in the context of digitalized welding production. all security
ndings can also be applied to the previous two layers when external parties are
involved.
5 product process layer
the third layer denes the overall product process. figure 9 describes the re-
spective movement of dierent products from involved parties to a nal good
from the welding production point of view. in addition to the established in-
terconnection of suppliers and customers, the iop service provider also stands
out, which will play an increasingly important role in a connected, digitalized
welding production. the borders of dierent companies reveal the issues of data
security and privacy more prominently than before. nevertheless, the envisioned
potential of data exchanges should make up for most of the associated risks as
outlined in the following, i.e., the benets should outweigh the risks perceived by
the dierent companies. the ow of information follows the produced products.
however, the result may be added value for any involved party due to insight
gained at another party.secure, ubiquitous utilization of data across process layers 15
fig. 9. the product process entails dierent parties (supplier, welding shop, service
provider and customer) and their products until the nal good is produced.
5.1 applications and methods
the concept of networked product quality was introduced [23] to show which
information sources can be used directly to describe product quality in the con-
text of welding. an essential component here is the acquisition of welding process
data, but also the integration of decisive boundary conditions such as informa-
tion about the workpiece-material. the latter information is available to the
supplier, but is not part of the inherent process data acquisition in welding pro-
duction. if this information is utilized in the sense of the networked product
quality, the welding shop is dependent on limited quality certicates on arrival
or in need of dedicated in-house material analysis. in this context, accessing in-
herent process data from the material supplier directly in welding production
is signicantly more useful. the casting production is working towards compre-
hensive simulation and monitoring of the material microstructure [13,27] which
is a crucial property for welding. the competences and process data for extract-
ing microstructural information of individual workpieces are therefore located at
the production site rather than at the welding production. nevertheless, knowl-
edge about where and how microstructural properties are distributed in a casted
workpiece are mandatory for successful welding. adding spatially resolved data
to the workpiece would eventually reduce testing eorts to nd specic param-
eter settings and the overall weld quality.16 s. mann et al.
besides, in the interest of the welding shop customer, new added value is
opened up with correspondingly aggregated data on the welding assembly. the
description of product quality between customer and supplier is often limited to
two simple states: ok and nok. the boundary between both states is dened by
the violation of dened quality characteristics. however, as soon as the customer
of the welding assembly has a reliable, higher resolution quality description from
the welding production, the products could be used more specically according
to their quality condition. thus, assemblies that would otherwise fall below the
nok limit remain viable in less stressed products. this measure could especially
benet welding productions with an inherently high-quality uctuation due to
process uncertainties.
apart from the established partners in welding production, a realistic as-
sumption is that an iop service provider will also have an increasingly important
role in welding production. cloud services for cross-location data communication
are often considered a security risk in today's industry and therefore valuable
data are commonly retained and processed locally [16]. if the service provider
remains a pure infrastructure provider, without having access to the content of
the data themselves, information security mandates properly implemented data
condentiality. however, the supported operations are limited in such a scenario
and considering, information from dierent parties is hard to achieve due to a
challenging key management [17].
on the contrary, the methods described in the previous paragraphs can
hardly be carried out locally by the welding manufacturer. iop service providers
and research institutions can make use of their information technology know-how
as well as the corresponding powerful computing hardware, which is indispens-
able for data-based methods of machine learning. at this point, however, the
question of how data can be abstracted to such an extent that sensitive informa-
tion can be protected without decimating its content comes to the fore. the main
challenge is that the value of specic process information is currently unknown
as new process dependencies rst have to be uncovered.
5.2 data security and data privacy
in contrast to the individual steps as discussed before, in this context, infor-
mation of the manufacturing and production steps must be shared in detail
to utilize further advances. proposing a global solution is unlikely as the value
of information diers between the dierent parties of the production process.
hence, the exact implementation must be dened depending on the use case.
furthermore, this categorization can only be made by domain experts, i.e., it
requires joint eorts by computer scientists and mechanical engineers alike, to
also protect intellectual properties and process know-how. thus, the individual
angles of improving the overall production process have to be analyzed in detail
before abstracting too much or too little information. the access of external
parties, who are part of the process, should be restricted to the minimum [15],
i.e., they may only retrieve information that is required to (a) work on their sub-
process and (b) improve the overall process. respective measures must be takensecure, ubiquitous utilization of data across process layers 17
to obfuscate sensitive data. time series recordings of arc welding voltage and
current can e.g. not only tell which arc welding process is used. such data can
also describe process parameters, process variants or even reveal the deployed
welding power source manufacturer.
in the future, newly collected information might become more valuable as
it can be combined with a large stash of past production data [9], i.e., future
data mining to improve the production process can rely on a large set of ex-
isting past process data. by integrating data sources of external parties, the
signicance of the available information can be further extended and improved.
to still fulll data security aspects that are mandated in today's production
process, the respective information can be protected by dierent concepts, such
as secure multiparty computation [17], secure ooading [28], privacy-preserving
queries [7], or dierential privacy [17]. the individual data collected during the
weld seam process are utilized here again on a dierent level and by a larger set
of dierent parties. regardless, similar considerations regarding information se-
curity hold. in the following, the concepts are briey put into perspective w.r.t.
the considered welding process.
secure multiparty computation. in a setting with valuable process data
that should not be shared with external parties, communication protocols based
on secure multiparty computation can help to enable collaborations between
distrusting parties. the general concept is to retain the input locally while the
participants jointly compute a function. during the computation, no information
is leaked and eventually both parties receive the result of the function. in the
context of welding, participating parties could, for example, jointly compute
whether oered material properties match the requirements of the weld seam
process without revealing the respective properties and requirements.
secure ooading. to utilize (powerful) resources in the cloud obliviously,
a welding assembly could encrypt their process data and conduct computations
on the encrypted data. when designing a privacy-preserving protocol, the cloud
cannot learn anything about the processed data. for example, a welding assembly
can check whether they measured the same electrical subtraces in the past to
then draw further conclusions about the expected quality of the weld seam.
depending on the level of established collaborations, even multiple parties could
send their encrypted data to the cloud to receive the joint result. however, in
this case, the cloud must be trusted to not share the input data with the other
parties.
privacy-preserving queries. in scenarios with an iop service provider, a
welding assembly might be interested to receive insight into a certain welding
operation without revealing the properties of the measured weld seam. similarly,
the iop service providers want to keep their knowledge base private. in such
a setting, privacy-preserving database queries can be used to allow a welding
assembly to receive insights from a service provider without either party gaining
access to the submitted query.
dierential privacy. while individual data points are valuable from a
business perspective, they might also help to identify the concrete order of a18 s. mann et al.
weld seam. consequentially, parties of a product process have an incentive to
hide these identifying characteristics. dierential privacy describes a concept
how to protect private information in a larger set of data. after application, no
private information can be identied as the data have been generalized, i.e., the
individual privacy is protected. in the context of welding, process data could
be processed before being handed over to the iop service provider for further
analysis.
overall, the chosen concept depends on the concrete use case and the require-
ments w.r.t. information leakage. unfortunately, the overhead for deploying them
is far from negligible as they must be carefully tailored to the use case. once,
approaches to improve the product process are widely established and collabo-
rating with external parties is a usual part of production, further advances can
be implemented by collaborating securely even with entities that have no di-
rect inuence on the production process [17] (this situation is not yet captured
in figure 9). an easy approach is to rely on the iop service provider to link
the product processes of dierent welding-related processes with the previously
considered welding process. however, such advances require trust into both the
intermediate party and the utilized data sources underlying any propositions to
improve the process.
6 conclusion
envisioned by advances, such as industrie 4.0 or the iop, process changes are
likely to also aect the production of welding workpieces. in particular, com-
panies hope to realize process improvements by connecting, digitalized weld-
ing processes to utilize ubiquitous data securely even across entities. in this
work, several applications have been presented which motivate to connect well-
established welding production entities among dierent process layers while tak-
ing into account aspects of data security and privacy. weld seam process layer.
the connection of transient welding process data with testing data can be uti-
lized to learn how to preemptively detect weld defects and improve the overall
weld quality. in addition, simple compliance checks can be introduced by includ-
ing wps parameters to mentioned data sets. as currently no company borders
are overstepped, each company internally has to agree how to implement ac-
countability and determine the level of security the respective implementation
has to achieve. assembly process layer. the data shape of event-logs has been in-
troduced, opening up the door to process mining. three established techniques,
namely process discovery, conformance and enhancement have been described in
the context of welding production to model, analyze and improve corresponding
processes. these methods are nevertheless not only applicable to the assembly
process layer but even to other processes, describing their universal character.
security and privacy concerns have been addressed with a framework for con-
dentiality in process mining. this framework allows the secure access to event
logs of data analysts by means of anonymizing and encryption without violating
the privacy of the production site.secure, ubiquitous utilization of data across process layers 19
product process layer. several use cases of interlinking data among dierent
entities, here even companies, have been described, motivating advantages for
each party involved. as security and privacy concerns rise especially to the fore,
deliberate methods, namely secure multiparty computation, secure ooading,
privacy-preserving queries and dierential privacy have been showcased.
overall, an interconnection of dierent entities who are part of the production
process can help to realize the envisioned welding advances in manifold ways.
the structure of process layers is oriented towards the established welding pro-
duction and prepares therefore the deliberate utilization of diverse information
sources without confusing dierent applications and their stakeholders. to this
end, the production landscape has to shift from a setting with locally retained
data silos to a scenario with secure industrial collaboration as part of an internet
of production.
acknowledgment
funded by the deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft (dfg, german research foun-
dation) under germany's excellence strategy { exc-2023 internet of produc-
tion { 390621612.
references
1. van der aalst, w.: process cubes: slicing, dicing, rolling up and drilling down
event data for process mining. in: asia-pacic conference on business process
management (2013)
2. van der aalst, w.: process mining: data science in action. springer (2016)
3. van der aalst, w., adriansyah, a., van dongen, b.: replaying history on process
models for conformance checking and performance analysis. wiley interdisciplinary
reviews: data mining and knowledge discovery 2(2) (2012)
4. bauernhansl, t.: wgp-standpunkt industrie 4.0. wgp, wissenschaftliche
gesellschaft f ur produktionstechnik (2016)
5. bergs, t., niemietz, p., pennekamp, j., kunze, i., trauth, d., wehrle, k.: stamp-
ing process modelling in an internet of production. in: cirp tesconf (2019)
6. bose, r.p.j.c., van der aalst, w., zliobait_ e, i., pechenizkiy, m.: handling concept
drift in process mining. in: international conference on advanced information
systems engineering (2011)
7. dahlmanns, m., dax, c., matzutt, r., pennekamp, j., hiller, j., wehrle,
k.: privacy-preserving remote knowledge system. in: ieee icnp (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1109/icnp.2019.8888121
8. dke deutsche kommission elektrotechnik elektronik informationstechnik in din
und vde: deutsche normungsroadmap industrie 4.0. tech. rep., din e.v. (2015)
9. gleim, l., pennekamp, j., liebenberg, m., buchsbaum, m., niemietz, p.,
knape, s., epple, a., storms, s., trauth, d., bergs, t., brecher, c., decker,
s., lakemeyer, g., wehrle, k.: factdag: formalizing data interoperability
in an internet of production. ieee internet things journal 7(4) (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1109/jiot.2020.296640220 s. mann et al.
10. hompes, b., buijs, j.c., van der aalst, w., dixit, p., buurman, h.: detecting
change in processes using comparative trace clustering. ceur workshop pro-
ceedings 1527 (2015)
11. jodlbauer, h.: digitale transformation der wertsch opfung. kohlhammer (2017)
12. kagermann, h., anderl, r., gausemeier, j., schuh, g., wahlster, w.: industrie
4.0 in a global context: strategies for cooperating with international partners.
herbert utz (2016)
13. liu, z., sun, h., xu, f., ma, d.: parameters determination of grain mi-
crostructure prediction for a single crystal casting simulation and its ex-
perimental validation. international journal of metalcasting 12(4) (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40962-018-0220-9
14. martjushev, j., bose, r.p.j.c., van der aalst, w.: change point detec-
tion and dealing with gradual and multi-order dynamics in process min-
ing. in: international conference on business informatics research (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-21915-8 11
15. pennekamp, j., dahlmanns, m., gleim, l., decker, s., wehrle, k.: security con-
siderations for collaborations in an industrial iot-based lab of labs. in: ieee
gciot (2019). https://doi.org/10.1109/gciot47977.2019.9058413
16. pennekamp, j., glebke, r., henze, m., meisen, t., quix, c., hai, r., gleim,
l., niemietz, p., rudack, m., knape, s., epple, a., trauth, d., vroomen, u.,
bergs, t., brecher, c., b uhrig-polaczek, a., jarke, m., wehrle, k.: towards
an infrastructure enabling the internet of production. in: ieee icps (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1109/icphys.2019.8780276
17. pennekamp, j., henze, m., schmidt, s., niemietz, p., fey, m., trauth, d.,
bergs, t., brecher, c., wehrle, k.: dataow challenges in an internet of
production: a security & privacy perspective. in: acm cps-spc (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3338499.3357357
18. pfeier, s.: industrie 4.0 und die digitalisierung der produktion{hype oder mega-
trend. aus politik und zeitgeschichte 65(31{32) (2015)
19. pourbafrani, m., van zelst, s.j., van der aalst, w.: scenario-based prediction
of business processes using system dynamics. in: on the move to meaningful
internet systems: otm 2019 conferences
20. pourbafrani, m., van zelst, s.j., van der aalst, w.: supporting decisions in pro-
duction line processes by combining process mining and system dynamics. in:
international conference on intelligent human systems integration
21. raei, m., von waldthausen, l., van der aalst, w.: ensuring condentiality in
process mining. ceur workshop proceedings 2270 (2018)
22. reinhart, g.: handbuch industrie 4.0: gesch aftsmodelle, prozesse, technik. carl
hanser (2017)
23. reisgen, u., mann, s., middeldorf, k., sharma, r., buchholz, g., willms, k.:
connected, digitalized welding production|industrie 4.0 in gas metal arc welding.
welding in the world 63(4) (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s40194-019-00723-2
24. roth, a.: einf uhrung und umsetzung von industrie 4.0: grundlagen, vorgehens-
modell und use cases aus der praxis. springer (2016)
25. schircks, a.d., drenth, r., schneider, r.: strategie f ur industrie 4.0: praxiswissen
f ur mensch und organisation in der digitalen transformation. springer (2017)
26. vogel-heuser, b., bauernhansl, t., ten hompel, m.: handbuch industrie 4.0 bd.
4. springer (2017)
27. zhu, x.f., yu, b.y., zheng, l., yu, b.n., li, q., l 'u, s.n., zhangr, h.: inuence of
pouring methods on lling process, microstructure and mechanical properties ofsecure, ubiquitous utilization of data across process layers 21
az91 mg alloy pipe by horizontal centrifugal casting. china foundry 15(3) (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41230-018-7256-6
28. ziegeldorf, j.h., pennekamp, j., hellmanns, d., schwinger, f., kunze, i.,
henze, m., hiller, j., matzutt, r., wehrle, k.: bloom: bloom lter based
oblivious outsourced matchings. bmc medical genomics 10(suppl 2) (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-017-0277-y