preprint  international journal of 
information systems and project management  
w.m.p. van der aalst. hybrid intelligence: to automate or not to automate, that is the question. 
international journal of information systems a nd project management, 9(2):5-20, 20 21.
i
nternational journal of information systems and project management  
1 hybrid intelligence: to automate or not to automate, 
that is the q uestion  
wil m.p. van der aalst  
rwth aachen university 
fraunhofer -institut für angewandte informationstechnik  
ahornstr. 55 , d-52074, aachen, germany  
wvdaalst@pads.rwth -aachen.de  
abstract:  
there used to be a clear separation between tasks done by machines and tasks done by people. applications of machine learning in speech recognition (e.g., alexa and siri), image recognition, automated translation, autonomous driving, and medical diagnosis, have blurred the classical divide between human tasks and machine tasks. although current 
artificial intelligence (ai) and machine learning (ml) technologies outperform humans in many areas, tasks requiring common sense, contextual knowledge, creativity, adaptivity, and empathy are still best performed by humans. hybrid intelligence (hi) blends human intelligence and machine intelligence to combine the best of both worlds. hence, 
current and future business process management (bpm) initiatives need  to cons ider hi  and the changing boundaries 
between work done by people and work done by software robots. consider , for example, the success of robotic process 
automation (rpa) , which demonstrates that gradually taking away repetitive tasks from workers is possible. in this 
viewpoint paper, we argue that process mining is a key technology to decide what to automate and what not. moreover, 
using process mining , it is possible to systematically monitor  and manage  processes where work is distributed over  
human workers and software robots.  
keyw ords:  
hybrid intelligence ; data science; process science; machine learning ; business process management . ijispm  
 
 
 
 
 
international journal of information systems and project management  
2 1. introduction  
machine learning (ml) and robotic process automation (rpa) have lowered the threshold to automate tasks 
previously done by humans  [5,7,10,11,17,23 ]. yet organizations are struggling to apply ml and rpa, effectively 
causing many digital transformation initiatives to fail. process mining techniques help to decide what should be automated and what not. interestingly, most processes work best using a combination of human and machine intelligence. therefore, we relate hybrid intelligence  (hi) to process management and process automation using rpa 
and process mining . 
as niels bohr once said “it is difficult to make predictions, especially about t he future ” and, of course, this also applies 
to process management and automation. in 1964, the rand corporation published a report with predictions about technological development based on the expectations of 82 experts across various fields  [5]. for 1980 , the report 
predicted that there would be a human -crew ed landing on mars , and families would have robots as household servants. 
we are still not any way close to visiting mars , and  40 years later, we only have robot vacuum cleaners. for 2020, the 
expectat ion was that we would breed apes and other animals to carry out our daily chores. none of this happened.  
when it comes to predictions about artificial intelligence (ai) , we can witness periods with great optimism and periods 
with great skepticism (called “ ai winters ”). in 1950, alan turing introduced the well -known turing test centering 
around the following question: can a human evaluator distinguish between a human and a machine using only natural language conversations? this question is still controversial and triggered questions like: can a machine have a mind, 
mental states, and consciousness in the same way that a human being can? independent of this philosophical debate, we 
can see that more and more tasks are taken over by software trained based on  examples. alan perlis wrote in 1982 “ a 
year spent in artificial intelligence is enough to make one believe in god ” and, indeed, it is amazing how ai 
technology can recognize images and sound, transl ate texts, and play games like g o and chess without using  a 
predefined strategy. however, there are still many tasks that are too difficult for ai.  in 2015, elon musk stated that  
“the tesla that is currently in production has the ability to do automatic steering autopilot on the highway. that is 
currently being beta tested and will go into a wide release early next month. so, we are probably only a month away 
from having autonomous driving at least for highways and for relatively simple roads. my guess for when we will have 
full autonomy is approximately three y ears.” in 2016, turing award winner geoffrey hinton stated that “it is quite 
obvious that we should stop training radiologists” expecting that image recognition algorithms would outperform 
humans very soon. however, we are still driving our cars, and there  is still a shortage of human radiologists. in short, 
we still need human s to do many tasks despite the amazing progress  in ai and ml. 
in this viewpoint paper , we focus on the question "to automate or not to automate? " thereby linking hybrid 
intelligence (hi)  [1,2,12,1 5], artificial intelligence (ai), and machine learning (ml) [9,13,16] to business process 
management (bpm)  [3,18]  and robotic process automation (rpa)  [4,17,23] . this question is highly relevant because 
there is consensus that ai/ml  will dramatically chang e the workplace [5,7 ,11]. figure 1 shows the results of a pwc 
study based on oecd data collected in the context of the program for the international assessment of adult 
competencies (piaac)  of the organization  for economic co operation and development (oecd) [7]. recalling niels 
bohr ’s quote  and the rand corporation report mentioned before, one should take such analys es with a grain of salt.  
nevertheless, it is worthwhile to try and identify jobs that might be of high risk of automation. the pwc study 
anticipates three waves  of automation until mid -2030: (1) algorithm wave  (early 2020s), (2) augmentation wave  (late 
2020s), and (3) autonomy wave  (mid 2030s)  [7]. the first wave focuses on the automation of simple computational 
tasks and analysis of structured data in areas like finance, insurance, information, and communication s. this wave is 
already a reality considering , for example , the closing of l ocal banks in  most countries. the second wave focuses on the 
automation of repeatable tasks such as filling in forms, communicating , and exchanging information using technologies 
such as rpa. the third wave will automate  of physical labor  and problem -solving in manufacturing and transport. 
figure 1 shows the expected impact of the three waves. for sure, the three automation waves will disrupt labor markets. 
initially, mostly admini strative work (e.g., in banking and insurance) is impacted, but over time,  also a substantial ijispm  
 
 
 
 
 
international journal of information systems and project management  
3 fraction of physical labor will d isappear . for example, autonomous vehicles will soon become a reality in 
transportation, storage, manufacturing, and construction.  
 
figure 1: pwc analysis of the piaac o ecd data predicting the proportion of existing jobs that may disappear due to 
automation by the mid -2030s in three overlapping waves [7].  
figure 2 shows the two types of automation considered in this paper. task a utomation is limited to a single task, e.g., 
automatically performing a credit check or making a payment. process automation  considers end -to-end processes. the 
purchase -to-pay (p2p)  process shown in figure 2 includes multiple activities. some of these act ivities may be 
automated, but independent of this , processes need  to be coordinated , controlled , and continuously improved and 
adapted . bpm and process mining focus on end -to-end processes. for example, process mining can be used to detect 
performance and compliance problems. such problems can automatically trigger corrective workflows. both types of 
automation may benefit from a human -machine symbiosis where human intellect is complemented by machine 
intelligence. h ow work  is divided  exactly remains a chal lenging question in years to come (see the three waves in 
figure 1).  
task automation : activities 
previously conducted by 
people are now done by 
software /hardware robots .process automation : the coordination , 
control , and improvement of end -to-end 
processes is now supported by data -driven 
technologies and low -code workflows .
 
figure 2: two types of automation: (1) task automation and (2) process automation. data -driven technologies such as 
ai, ml,  rpa, and process mining can support both types of automation. however, often a combination of human 
intelligence and machine intelligence leads to the best results.  ijispm  
 
 
 
 
 
international journal of information systems and project management  
4 hybrid intelligence  (hi) is one of the key elements in digital transformation initiatives , i.e., the adoption of digital 
technology to transform services or businesses by replacing non -digital or manual processes with digital processes or 
replacing older digital technology with newer digital technology. this extends beyond traditional automation and may 
include new ty pes of innovation and creativity, e.g., new business models, new sales channels, new products , and new 
services. such changes typically  require , but also accelerate,  task and process automation.  
the remainder of this viewpoint paper is organized as follows. section 2 introduces hybri d intelligence (hi). section 3 
provides a critical analysis of traditional bpm initiatives highlighting three main problems. section 4 introduces rpa as 
a technology for task automation. section 5 introduces process mining as a technology to make bpm more data- driven 
and enable new forms of process automation. section 6 relates the different topics, advocating a convergence of hi, bpm, rpa, ml, and process mining . section 7 concludes the paper.  
2. hybrid intelligence  
deep blue, a chess -playing computer develope d by ibm, won its first game against world champion garry kasparov in 
1996. alphago, a go -playing computer developed by deepmind technologies, defeated the best -ranked go player  ke 
jie in 2017.  the more powerful alphago zero learned by just playing games a gainst itself, but was able to defeat any 
human player by the end of 2017. speech recognition software has been around since the 1950s when bell laboratories 
presented the “audrey” system  that was able to recognize the numbers 1 to 9.  ibm ’s “shoebox ” system  presented in 
1962 was able to recognize 16 words. until a decade ago, speech recognition software would not function very well . 
however, today we are surrounded by  amazon ’s alexa, apple ’s siri, microsoft’ s cortana,  google assistant,  etc. a 
similar development can be seen in image recognition and many tasks that before could only be done by humans. these 
successes can be attributed to progress in deep learning,  where artificial neural networks  (anns) having multiple 
layers  progressively extract higher -level features from the raw input  [9,16]. although n eural networks  had been around 
for decades, these techniques started to outperform classical approaches around 2012.  today, there is a lot of 
excitement about the amazing possibilities of deep learning. however, also the limitations become i ncreasingly visible , 
especially in organizational settings and situations with limited data or many changes.  
it is not easy to clearly define terms related to “intelligence ” and “learning ”. the “ai effect ”, commonly known as 
tesler ’s theorem, says that “ artificial intelligence is whatever hasn ’t been done yet ”. (actually, larry tesler said 
“intelligence is whatever machines haven’ t done yet ”.) tesler ’s theorem shows that things that were previously seen as 
artificial intelligence (ai) are removed from the d efinition of ai when they become standard. when people use the 
term ai today, they often refer to machine learning (ml) based on anns. however, for most of its  history , ai was 
dominated by symbolic ai , also known as “classical ai ”, “rule-based ai ”, and “good old-fashioned ai ”, and associated 
with expert systems and logical reasoning. in recent year s, ai got increasingly associated with ml. 
ml techniques are data- driven and learn from data without explicitly being programmed. we typically distinguish 
between trai ning data and test data. for example, we train an ann to distinguish dog and cat pictures that are labeled. 
while training , the ann updates the weights in the internal representation until the number of incorrectly classified 
pictures is minimized. then th e trained ann is used to classify test data, i.e., unseen dog and cat pictures that need to 
be classified correctly. given enough training data,  such an ann may perform amazingly well in practice,  although it 
was never programmed to do so and has no explicit kno wledge of cats and dogs. deepmind ’s alphago zero learned to 
play go in a superior manner by just knowing the rules and playing against itself. there are many machine learning 
techniques ranging from classical approaches such as regression, decision trees, logistic regression, k -means clustering, 
and principal component analysis to support vector machines, convolutional neural networks,  autoencoders,  long short -
term memory  networks, and generative adversarial networks. approaches can be classified into super vised learning 
(using labeled data, e.g., for classification), unsupervised learning (using unlabeled data, e.g., to discover unknown patterns), and reinforcement learning  (finding the balance between the exploration of uncharted territory and the 
exploitation  of current knowledge) . ijispm  
 
 
 
 
 
international journal of information systems and project management  
5 ml can be seen as part of data science, i.e., the broader interdisciplinary field aiming to turn data into real value. data 
may be structured or unstructured, big or small, static or streaming. value may be provided in the form of predictions, 
automated decisions, models learned from data, or any type of data visualization delivering insights. data science 
includes data extraction, data preparation, data exploration, data transformation, storage and retrieval, computing 
infrastructur es, various types of mining and learning, presentation of explanations and predictions, and the exploitation 
of results taking into account ethical, social, legal, and business aspects [19].  
human intelligence
machine intelligencehybrid 
intelligencefast
efficient
cheap
scalable
consistentflexible
creative
emphatic
instinctive
commonsensical 
data and algorithmspeople and experiences
 
figure 3: hybrid intelligence (hi) aims to combine the best of human intelligence and machine intelligence.  
hybrid intelligence  (hi), sometimes also called augmented intelligence , emphasizes the assistive role ml, i.e., deep 
neural nets and other data -driven techniq ues are there to enhance human intelligence rather than to replace it (just like 
telescopes are there to enhance human vision). in [2], dellermann et al. define hybrid intelligence (hi) as “the ability to 
achieve complex goals by combining human and artifi cial intelligence, thereby reaching superior results to those each 
of them could have accomplished separately, and continuously improve by learning from each other ”. 
figure 3 illustrates t hat hybrid intelligence  (hi) combines both  two forms of intelligence.  
• human intelligence  is about people and experiences and can be characterized by terms such as flexible, 
creative, emphatic, instinctive, and commonsensical.  
• machine intelligence  is about data and algorithms and can be characterized by terms such as fast, efficient, 
cheap, scalable, and consistent.   
hi aims to combine the best of both worlds. the spectacular developments in ml have extended the reach of software and hardware robots. once a robot is able to perform a repetitive task at a similar level of quality, it is often also more 
cost-effective. the rise of the “ platform economy ” has accelerated this. transaction platforms that match supply and 
demand (e.g., amazon, alibaba, airbnb, uber, and baidu) and technology platforms (e.g., microsoft’s software 
platform and the app stores of googl e and apple)  have the characteristic that they grow very fast and that, in the end, 
often one winner remains (due to the traditional economy of scale, low marginal costs, and network effects).  due to 
these plat forms new technologies can be adopted fast  at a global scale.  however, humans s till have unique capabilities. 
consider , for ex ample , disruptive events like the covid -19 pandemic where one is confronted with completely new 
challenges that require flexibility, creativity, and intuition. people have the ability to transfer experiences from one 
problem domain to another. moreover, em pathy (i.e., t he capacity to understand or feel what another person is ijispm  
 
 
 
 
 
international journal of information systems and project management  
6 experiencing) and ethics (i.e., reasoning about moral concepts such as good and evil, right and wrong, virtue and vice, 
justice and crime) require human intelligence [21]. in hi,  human intelligence and machine intelligence complement 
each other.  
human intelligence in the 
loop of machine intelligencemachine intelligence in the 
loop of human intelligence
 
figure 4: human in the loop or machine in the loop?  
 
figure 4  shows how human intelligence and machine intelligence can be combined. the lef t-hand side shows the 
traditional use of ai/ml in organizations. ai/ml is used to provide decision support or assist in performing  repetitive 
tasks. for example, a data -driven sales forecast supports decision- making in logistics and production,  or ml algor ithms 
help to speed up standard routines of image acquisition in radiography. the human is in control , and ai/ml is used as a 
tool. the right -hand side of figure 4 shows the opposite situation. machine intelligence is used to automatically 
processes cases without human intervention. however, the machine can call the human for help in exceptional cases.  
for example, credit scoring or x -ray diagnostics are performed automatically, but boundary cases are evaluated by 
human experts.  
the interplay between huma n intelligence and machine intelligence may lead to new insights. alphago showed human 
players new strategies for playing go, as has been acknowledged by the world ’s leading go players.  shi yue said 
“alphago’s game last year transformed the industry of go and its players. the way alphago showed its level was far 
above our expectations and brought many new elements to the game. ” zhou ruiyang said “ i believe players more or 
less have all been affected by professor alpha. alphago’s play makes us feel more free and no move is impossible to 
play anymore. now everyone is trying to play in a style that hasn’t been tried before. ” this example shows that humans 
can learn from machines. this also applies to operational processes e.g. , in healthcare or sales. therefore, organizations 
need to embrace hi and actively manage the constantly shifting distribution of work between workers and robots . 
3. business process management: a critical analysis  ijispm  
 
 
 
 
 
international journal of information systems and project management  
7 in this viewpoint paper, we focus on the relation between  hi and business proce ss management  (bpm)  [3,18] , 
considering new technologies such as ml, rpa, and process mining.  
already in  the 1970s, people like skip ellis and michael zisman worked on so- called office information systems, which 
were driven by explicit process mod els. systems such as officetalk and scoop can be seen as early workflow 
management (wfm) systems. however, it took another 15 years until wfm technology was ready to be applied on a 
large scale. in the mid -nineties, many commercial wfm systems were availab le and there was the expectation that 
wfm systems would be an integral part of any information system. many people, including the author, expected that 
these systems would be come as common as database management systems. however, this did not happen. wfm 
systems  were succeeded by business process management (bpm) systems that were broader in scope, but were also 
never widely adopted. examples of bpm systems include the software products from pegasystems, appian, ibm, 
bizagi, oracle, software ag, tibco software, b onitasoft, kofax, and signavio.  however, despite the availability of 
wfm/bpm systems, process management was never subcontracted to such systems at a scale comparable to database management systems. actually, a few years ago, many considered the area of b usiness process management (bpm) to 
be dead. organizations associated bpm with making process models rather than diagnosing and improving processes. there were three mai n reasons for this skepticism:  
• applying wfm/bpm technology was rather expensive. proce sses are hardcoded in application software or not 
supported at all. many processes also u se software from different vendors, making a seamless integratio n 
difficult and time -consuming.  
• although the “m” in wfm and bpm refers to “ management ”, the focus is on modeli ng and automation rather 
than management. traditional wfm/bpm systems fail to learn from the event data they collect.  
• real-life processes are more complex  than people like to believe. the well -known 80 -20 rule applies to 
processes, i.e., 80% of all cases are rather simple, but explain only 20% of the complexity of the process. the 
remaining 20% of cases tend to be neglected by software and management, but consume 80% of the resources 
of an organization.  
 
classic
bpmhuman 
behaviordata-driven 
systems
actual/effective 
process improvements
o2c, p2p processes having 
hundreds of thousands of variants.information systems having thousands 
of tables with complex dependencies 
recording what people really do.
transforming insights 
into actions (not models 
or powerpoints).
 
figure 5: old-school  bpm  tends to be (1) unable to capture human behavior, (2) unable to deal with the complexity of 
real-life systems , and (3) unable to realize actual improvements . ijispm  
 
 
 
 
 
international journal of information systems and project management  
8 figure 5 hypothesizes about possible reasons for the limited success of  traditional wfm/bpm systems and approaches. 
human behavior and information systems tend to be oversimplified,  leading to a disconnect  with reality . moreover, it is 
often impossible to show that the process actually improved.  in the remainder of this sect ion, we elaborate on each of  
the three problems highlighted in figure 5.  
3.1 inability to capture human behavior  
simple processes such as order -to-cash (o2c) and purchase -to-pay (p2p) tend to be much more complicated than 
expected. it is not uncommon to find thousands of process variants, i.e., unique ways of executing o2c or p2p 
processes (just considering the ordering for activities). some of these variants may be undesirable. however, deviations often have good reason s. people are adapting to contextual factors , not present in the process model. it is also very 
difficult to create simulation models that exhibit the real behavior o f an organization. it is possible to create so -called 
“digital twins ” of highly- structured production processes. however, in processes where human  actors are in the lead and 
where people need  to distribute attention over multiple processes , it is still impossible to create meaningful “ digital 
twins ” that have a n acceptable  predictive value. these difficulties show why traditional wfm/bpm systems and 
approaches  failed. assum ing that reality can be captured in the form of a bpmn ( business process model and 
notation ) and implemented using a wfm/bpm system  is a recipe for disaster.  
3.2 inability to deal with the complexity of real- life systems  
moreover , real -life information systems ar e more complicated than stakeholders like to think. when making process 
models and talking about new systems, people tend to underestimate the complexity of the underlying data.  standard 
systems like sap ’s s/4hana contain hundreds of thousands of tables. o f course, a typical organization uses only a 
subset of these tables. however, it shows the complexity of real -life information systems. data related to one process 
may be scattered over dozens or even hundreds of tables connected through primary key and fo reign key relationship s. 
although relational databases are well -understood and more structured than nos ql-based non- relational databases , 
these cannot be described using a uml class diagram and bpmn model. nevertheless, many wfm/bpm vendo rs 
suggested that it would be easy to replace existing systems using a properly configured wfm/bpm system. this is , of 
course , not the case. it is very naïve to think that existing systems can be replaced easily.  there are numerous examples 
of failed erp s ystems implementations that drove companies into bankruptcy (e.g., shane co., american lafrance, 
foxmeyer corp., etc.).  these bankruptcy cases had in common that people underestimated the complexity. the author 
has witnessed numerous organizations that sel ected a wfm/bpm system that never went into production.  therefore, it 
is important to try and realize process improvements while keeping the existing information systems. rpa (see section 
4) builds on top of existing information systems while automating re petitive work.  
3.3 inability to realize actual improvements  
the third  problem highlighted in figure 5  is the limited ability to provide actionable results. making process models, 
organizing workshops /meetings , and implementing new information systems do not necessarily lead to process 
improvements. some of the larger organizations have invested in creating repositories of process models. however, 
such repositories become outdated quickly and do not necessarily impact the operational processes.  actually, most 
workers are not awar e of their existence . wallpaper -sized bpmn model s that aim to be close to reality are too abstract 
because they are not connected to the actual data,  and stakeholders can always question their validity. process mining  
(see section 5) address es this by showing continuously updated process maps that show the current situation.  
 
the problems highlighted in figure 5  explain  why organizations embraced rpa and process mining  during the last 
decade. both helped to revive  the interest in bpm.  rpa can be used to automate routine work that would normally not 
be cost -effective. process mining plays a key role in deciding what to automate and how. moreover, process mining ijispm  
 
 
 
 
 
international journal of information systems and project management  
9 helps to capture the actual end -to-end processes while acknowledging their complexity and focusing on the real 
problems.  
4. robotic process automation : focusing on individual tasks  
robotic process automation (rpa) has lowered the threshold f or process automation  [23]. repetitive tasks done by 
people are handed over to software robots. for rpa, there is no need to change or replace the pre- existing information 
systems  (e.g., sap) . instead, software robots replace users by interacting directly with the user interfaces normally 
operated by humans. rpa can be seen as “the poor man’ s workflow management solution ” because it is o ften much 
cheaper than traditional automation  [23]. figure 6 show the main idea of rpa. in most organizations,  one can easily 
find pe ople whose main job is to connect information systems using copy -and-paste actions and simple repetitive tasks. 
these provide the required “ glue” between applications and the outside world. despite the repetitive nature of the work , 
it is not cost- effectiv e to replace the information systems used. systems may be provided by different vendors and may 
be too old to change (legacy software). therefore, it is cheaper to copy -and-paste address information or send e -mails 
manually. rpa does not aim to change th e existing systems but take over the repetitive work of people . it is a form of 
automation using software robots (bots) replacing humans.  
 
 
figure 6: in many organizations , humans are the glue between applications  and the outside world (left) . this leads to 
repetitive tasks that can also be done by software robots without changing the underlying information systems.  
the three main rpa vendors are uipath (founded in 2005), automation anywhere (founded in 2003), and blue prism 
(founded in 2001). other vendors include workfusion, kryon systems, softomotive, contextor, edgeverve, nice, and 
redwood software.  the key difference between rpa and traditional wfm/bpm is that rpa does not aim to replace 
existing (b ack-end) information systems. instead, software robots interact with the existing information systems in the 
same way as humans do. in traditional wfm/bpm systems, the process is specified precisely , and the wfm/bpm 
system orchestrates the modeled process by implementing simple activities and calling pre -existing applications through 
application programming interfaces (apis). in contrast, rpa software interacts with the pre- existing applications 
through (graphical) user interfaces directly replacing humans,  i.e., automation is realized by taking over tasks from ijispm  
 
 
 
 
 
international journal of information systems and project management  
10 workers directly through the user interface. a typical rpa scenario is a sequence of copy -and-paste actions normally 
performed by a human.  
 
figure 7: rpa shifts the boundary of cost -effective automation and can therefore be seen as n be seen as “ the poor 
man’s workflow management solution ”. process mining complements rpa b y identifying routine work and monitoring 
process es before and after the intr oduction of rpa.  
before introducing rpa, one needs to analyze the processes to be automated. process mining can help to identify 
promising candidates  [3,21,24] . moreover, after rpa has been implemented, process mining can be used to monitor 
processes and s ystems even if these use a mixture of rpa, workers, and traditional automation.  this is illustrated by 
figure 7. the figure shows that processes and process variants can be sorted by frequency. obviously, one would like to automate the most frequent proces ses and process variants first. because traditional automation (e.g., using wfm/bpm 
systems or writing abap code to change sap) is rather expensive , there often exist many repetitive tasks which a re not 
automated. this correspond s to the middle of the spect rum depicted in figure 7. after introducing rpa there are three 
types of tasks: (1) tasks handled by the information system using traditional automation, (2) tasks handled by software 
robots, and (3) low -frequent tasks still done manually. the whole can be monitored and analyzed using process mining 
as is discussed next.  
5. process mining : focusing on end- to-end processes  
rpa can be seen as a bottom -up activity, i.e., removing repetitive tasks. process mining can help to identify and 
automatically learn such t asks [3,21,24]. however, the primary use  case of process mining is the top -down analysis of 
end-to-end processes  [19,22,23] . process mining techniques use event data to show what people, machines, 
applications, and organizations are really doing. process m ining provides novel insights that can be used to identify and 
address performance and compliance problems. just like spreadsheets can do anything with numbers, process mining 
can do anything with event data, i.e., it is a generic, domain -independent technology to improve processes. there are 
over 35 commercial offerings of process mining software (e.g., celonis, disco, processgold, myinvenio, pafnow, apromore, minit, qpr, mehrwerk, puzzledata, lanalabs, process diamond, everflow, time linepi, signavio, and 
logpickr), next to open- source tools like prom, pm4py, bupar , and rapidprom.  
 ijispm  
 
 
 
 
 
international journal of information systems and project management  
11 
 
 
figure 8: event data serve as the starting point for process mining. such data can be used to discover what the real 
proces s is, where the bottlenecks are, where the process deviates, and what the root -causes are. if there is enough data 
and the process is stable, then it is even possible to predict performance and conformance problems.  
all process -mining  tools start from even t data . an event log is a collection of events stored using a format like xes  
(xes-standard.org) . an event may have many different attributes, but at least a case identifier , an activity name , and a 
timestamp . additional attributes may refer to locations, resources, costs, transactional information, and energy 
consumed. events are grouped using the case identifier and sorted using the timestamps. hence, each case corresponds 
to a trace, i.e., a sequence of events. focusing on the activity names only, these traces can be grouped into variants, i.e., 
sequences of activities. figure 8 illustrates the typical use of process mining using  a small  event log with 71,043 event s, 
12,666 cases, and 7 unique activities . a possible trace is the sequence <place order, sen d invoice, pay, prepare 
delivery, make delivery, confirm payment >. there are over 8000 cases corresponding to this activity sequence. using 
process mining,  one can uncover compliance and performance problems . initially, process mining efforts focused on 
process discovery . however, over time it has become clear that process discovery is just the starting point to process 
improvement. one can witness an uptake in conformance checking and performance analysis techniques. moreover, process mining is often combi ned with ml techniques to find root causes for inefficiencies and deviations.  as was 
illustrated by figure 7, event logs often follow  a pareto distribution, i.e., a few variants explain a large proportion of the 
event log.  
 ijispm  
 
 
 
 
 
international journal of information systems and project management  
12 
discover
align
replay
enrich
apply
compare
information 
systems
extract
process 
models
explore
 select
filter
clean
conformance
performance 
diagnostics
transform
act
 show
interpret
drill down
ml
 
 
figure 9: a high -level overview of process mining,  showing also the different activities.  
 
figure 9 provides another , more high- level, view on process mining. process mining starts by extracting event data 
from informatio n systems. this may be quite involved since traditional process mining techniques assume an event log 
with a single case notion. using object -centric process mining , this requirement can be relaxed, i.e., each event may 
refer to any number of objects and i t is possible to discover more holistic process models [24]. however, most 
approaches still assume a single case notation and logs in the form of an xes file or a similar database table. such event 
data are used to discover process models showing the real process. such models can be enriched with frequency and 
timing information. given a discovered or normative process model it is also possible to do conformance checking and 
highlight deviations. next to visualizing conformance and performance problems , it is possible to explain and predict 
these. note that process discovery and conformance checking are unrelated to mainstream ai/ml techniques. however, 
process mining can be used to generate standard classification problems, e.g., what are the characteristic s of the cases 
that deviate, fail, or get delayed. this can be used to predict such problems and recommend actions.   
one can witness a shift in focus from backward -looking to forward- looking process mining  [22]. organizations are 
more interested in what is happing now or  what is going to happen next. backward -looking process mining can be used 
to fundamentally improve processes, but provides little support for the day -to-day management of processes. therefore, 
event data need to be updated continuously and process -mining techniques need to be able to analyze cases that are still 
running. this is needed to control and influence the running process instances. techniques for operational support (i.e., detecting compliance and performance problems at runtime, predicting such p roblems, and recommending actions) have 
been around for more than a decade. however, the challenge is to make these techniques more reliable and also trigger the actions needed.  
action -oriented process mining (aopm) focuses on automated corrections actions  based on process mining 
diagnostics [14]. aopm  turns observed events into management actions when needed. the goal is not to support the 
operational process itself (that already exists in some form), but to support the management of the process. process mining diagnostics related to compliance and performance combined with process knowledge and reinforcement 
learning provide the ingredients for a reactive system that automatically triggers management workflows , improving the 
process. the goal of aopm is no t to automate the tasks, but the management of the process.  note that, like rpa, 
aopm does not aim at replacing the original information system. the acquisition of integromat, a low -code  online ijispm  
 
 
 
 
 
international journal of information systems and project management  
13 automation platform , by celonis illustrates this development. integromat provides over 500 application connectors  to 
interact with the most widely used information systems  (salesforce, office,  teams, twitter , etc.). when the celonis 
process mining system detects a known problem, integromat  can trigger the required corrective actions.  
 
6. towards the convergence o f hi, bpm, rpa, ml, and process mining.  
in section 3, we argued that o ld-school bpm tends to be (1) unable to capture human behavior, (2) unable to deal with 
the complexity of real -life systems, and (3) unable to realize actual improvements.  process mining  helps to address (1) 
and (3) by looking at the real processes in an objective manner before and after interventions. moreover, just like rpa 
process mining  does not try to replace existing systems and face the complexity of real -life systems  (2). 
often, a  small percentage of activities account for most of the events, and a small percentage of trace variants account 
for most of the traces. for example, 20% of the activities may account for 80% of the events. similarly, the 20% most 
frequent process variants  may explain 80% of the cases. traditional process automation focuses on the most frequent 
activities and process variants. only for high -frequent activities and process variants, it may be cost -effective to 
automate tasks and introduce classic wfm/bpm sof tware. less frequent activities and process variants need to be 
handled by workers that exploit human flexibility and creativity. as shown using figure 7, rpa focuses on the middle 
part, i.e., routine work that is not frequent enough to be automated in the traditional sense. proce ss mining is a crucial 
technology to identify routine work that can be supported using rpa. therefore, we claim that process mining can be 
used to pick the “ automation battles ” that are cost -effective and feasible.  
this vision matches well with the notion of hybrid intelligence (hi). we should not aim for a strict divide between 
work done by software robots and work done by humans. process mining can be used to detect routine work that can be automated by mimicking the behavior of workers. rather than manua lly programming robots, process discovery can be 
used to configure the robots correctly. part of the work formerly done by workers is now done by software robots. 
process mining can be used to check whether the processes run as planned. if a software robot  malfunctions due to 
technical glitches, exceptions, changing user interfaces, or changing contextual factors, then this can be detected using conformance checking techniques. note that a lack of human oversight of the work produced by robots constitutes a  
real risk of catastrophic outcomes.  
using combinations of process mining and machine learning, it is possible to flexibly distribute work over workers and 
software robots. for example, tasks are initially performed by robots and are escalated to workers the moment there is a 
complication or exception. similarly, workers can hand off work to robots using an “auto-complete ” option. moreover, 
the rpa solution may adapt due to changes in the underlying process (e.g., concept drift).  
the goal of rpa is to part ially automate tasks in the process, and process mining can help identify where this makes the 
most sense. however, rpa builds on top of existing systems ranging from sap and salesforce to homegrown applications. it is unr ealistic to assume that rpa and ml  will replace these systems. hybrid intelligence (hi) should 
not only combine human intelligence and machine intelligence; it should also do this in a complex landscape of existing 
systems. hence, it is naïve to assume that process -mining results will replace existing systems handling the operational 
tasks. however, there are many opportunities to use process -mining results to automatically manage the process better.  
 
7. conclusion  
this viewpoint paper discussed hybrid intelligence  (hi) from the viewpoint of task a nd process automation.  we started 
with the question “to automate or not to a utomate? ”. the question of what to automate is not new. however, with the 
uptake of machine learning (ml) and artificial intelligence (ai), the tradeoffs are changing rapidly . due to advances 
in ai/ml, the answer to th e question will change continuously. hi suggests that for many of the more challen ging ijispm  
 
 
 
 
 
international journal of information systems and project management  
14 tasks,  we will need to mixture of human and machine intelligence to get the best results. although deep learning has 
had an amazing success in areas such as  speech recognition, automated translation, image recognition, smart 
maintenance, and sentiment analysis, there are also obvious limitations.  machine intelligence tends to fast, efficient, 
cheap, scalable, and consistent , but also  inflexible, non-creative,  non-emphatic, non-instinctive, and lacking common 
sense.  in hi, human intelligence (i.e., people hav ing experience  and domain expertise) complements m achine 
intelligence . we introduced hi and indicated the relevance for task and process automation.  
we als o provided a critical analysis of traditional wfm/bpm approaches.  we identified weaknesses of traditional 
approaches that were not data- driven while trying to  replace existing systems  based on process models . in hindsight, 
these approaches can be considered naïve  for two reasons. first of all, real processes have a lot of variability due to 
human behavior. simple p2p or o2c processes may have thousands of variants , and this is in stark contrast with the 
oversimplified models produced by humans. second, information systems like sap’s erp system are extremely 
complex with thousands of database tables. therefore, attempts to simply replace such systems are destined to fail. 
robotic process automation (rpa)  and process mining address these limitations  by better using the available data and 
systems.  rpa  builds upon existing systems by taking over repetitive tasks from humans. rpa is often used in a bottom -
up manner realizing quick wins. process mining can be used for identifying rpa opportunities. however, process  
mining also views processes in a more holistic top -down manner.  a recent development in the field of process mining is 
that performance and conformance problems a utomatically  trigger corrective workflows leveraging both the data and 
systems present. h owever, data-driven techniques should also be able to say “i do not know ” or “i’m not sure ” and 
leave decisions to people . this is the t rue spirit of hi  where people, data, and software augment each other . 
 
acknowledgments  
the author thanks the alexander von humboldt (avh) stiftung for supporting his research.  
 references  
[1] d. dellermann, a. calma, n. lipusch, t. weber, s. weigel, and p. ebel. the future of human -ai 
collaboration: a taxonomy of design knowledge for hybrid intelligence systems. hawaii international 
conference on system sciences (hicss 2019), pages 1- 10, 2016.  
[2] d. dellermann, p. ebel, m. söllner, j.m. leimeister. hybrid intelligence. business and information systems engineering, 61(5):637 -643, 2019  
[3] m. dumas, m. la rosa, j. mendling, h. reijers. fundamentals of business process management. springer, 
2018.  
[4] j.g. enríquez, a. jiménez -ramírez, f.j. domínguez- mayo, and j.a. garcía- garcía. robotic process 
automation: a scientific and industrial systematic mapping study.  ieee access, volume 8, pages 391 13-
39129, 2020.  
[5] c.b. frey and m.a. osborne. the future of employment: how susceptible are jobs to computerisation? 
technological forecasting and social change 114:254- 280, 2017.  
[6] t.j. gordon and o. helmer -hirschberg. report on a long -range forecasting study. rand corporation, 1964.  
[7] j. hawksw orth, r. berriman, and s. goel. will robots really steal our jobs? an international analysis of the 
potential long term impact of automation. technical report, pricewaterhousecoopers, 2018.  ijispm  
 
 
 
 
 
international journal of information systems and project management  
15 [8] e. kamar. directions in hybrid intelligence: complementing ai systems with human intelligence.  proceedings 
of the twenty- fifth international joint conference on artificial intelligence (ijcai 2016), pages 4070 –4073, 
2016.  
[9] y. lecun, y. bengio, and g. hinton. deep learning. nature, 521:436 -444, 2015.  
[10] v. leno, a. polyvyanyy , m. dumas, m. la rosa, and f.m. maggi. robotic process mining: vision and 
challenges. business and information systems engineering, 2020.  
[11] t.a. leopold, v. ratcheva, and s. zahidi. the future of jobs report. technical report, centre for the new 
economy an d society, world economic forum, 2018.  
[12] m. mirbabaie, s. stieglitz, and n. frick.  hybrid intelligence in hospitals: towards a research agenda for 
collaboration. electron markets, 2021.  
[13] t. mitchell. machine learning. mcgraw -hill, 1997.  
[14] g. park and w. m. p. van der aalst. a general framework for action -oriented process mining. business 
process management workshops 2020, lecture notes in business information processing 397, springer, 206-
218, 2020.  
[15] m. peeters et al. hybrid collective intelligence in a human –ai society. ai & society, 36(1):217– 238, 2021.  
[16] d.e. rumelhart, g. hinton, and r.j. williams. learning representations by back -propagating errors. nature, 
323:533- 536, 1986.  
[17] r. syed et al. robotic process automation: contemporary themes and challenges. comput ers in industry, 
volume 115, 2020.  
[18] w.m.p. van der aalst. business process management: a comprehensive survey. isrn software engineering, 
pages 1 -37, 2013.  
[19] w.m.p. van der aalst. process mining: data science in action. springer -verlag, berlin, 2016.  
[20] w.m.p. van der aalst. responsible data science: using event data in a “people friendly” manner. in 
enterprise information systems. iceis 2016. lecture notes in business information processing, volume  291. 
springer, 2016.  
[21] w.m.p. van der aalst. on the par eto princ iple in process mining, task mining,  and robotic process 
automation. in proceedings of the 9th international conference on data science, technology and applications 
(data 2020), pages 5- 12. scitepress, 2020.  
[22] w.m.p. van der aalst. development of the process  mining discipline. in l. reinkemeyer, editor, process 
mining in action: principles, use cases and outlook, pages 181 -196. springer -verlag, berlin, 2020.  
[23] w.m.p. van der aalst, m. bichler, and a. heinzl. robotic process automation. business and information 
systems engineering, 60(4):269– 272, 2018.  
[24] w.m.p. van der aalst and a. berti. discovering object -centric petri nets. fundamenta informaticae, 175(1 -
4):1-40, 2020.  
 ijispm  
 
 
 
 
 
international journal of information systems and project management  
16  
biographical notes  
 
 wil m.p. van der aalst  
wil van der aalst is a full professor at rwth aachen university leading the process and data 
science (pads) group. his research interests include process mining, petri nets, business process 
manage ment, workflow management, process modeling, and process analysis. he is also part -time 
affiliated with the fraunhofer fit and a member of the board of governors of tilburg university. 
next to serving on the editorial boards of over ten scientific journals , he is also playing an advisory 
role for several companies, including celonis, fluxicon, and uipath. van der aalst is an ifip 
fellow, ieee fellow, acm fellow, and received honorary degrees from the moscow higher 
school of economics (prof. h.c.), tsinghua university, and hasselt university (dr. h.c.). he is also 
an elected member of the royal netherlands academy of arts and sciences, the royal holland 
society of sciences and humanities, the academy of europe, and the north rhine- westphalian 
academy of scien ces, humanities and the arts. in 2018, he was awarded an alexander -von-
humboldt professorship.  
 
 
 