an event data extraction approach from sap
erp for process mining
alessandro berti1;2, gyunam park1, majid raei1, and wil van der aalst1;2
1process and data science group (pads), rwth aachen university, germany
2fraunhofer gesellschaft, institute for applied information technology (fit),
sankt augustin, germany
abstract. the extraction, transformation, and loading of event logs
from information systems is the rst and the most expensive step in
process mining. in particular, extracting event logs from popular erp
systems such as sap poses major challenges, given the size and the struc-
ture of the data. open-source support for etl is scarce, while commercial
process mining vendors maintain connectors to erp systems supporting
etl of a limited number of business processes in an ad-hoc manner. in
this paper, we propose an approach to facilitate event data extraction
from sap erp systems. in the proposed approach, we store event data in
the format of object-centric event logs that eciently describe executions
of business processes supported by erp systems. to evaluate the feasi-
bility of the proposed approach, we have developed a tool implementing
it and conducted case studies with a real-life sap erp system.
keywords: sap ·etl ·process mining ·object-centric event logs
1 introduction
process mining is a branch of data science including techniques to discover process
models from event data, so-called process discovery , check the compliance of
data against the process models, so-called conformance checking , and enhance
process models with constraints/information coming from the event logs, so-
called enhancement . such techniques have been adopted by various domains,
including healthcare, manufacturing, and logistics. the rst step of applying
the techniques is to extract event logs from the target information systems, e.g.,
enterprise resource planning (erp) systems. this usually requires a connection
to the database(s) supporting the information system. afterward, the extracted
event log undergoes pre-processing steps to resolve various data quality issues,
including incomplete information, noise, etc. these steps are usually called etl
(extraction, transformation, and load). the etl phase is usually the most
time-consuming part of a process mining project [12].
erp systems contain valuable data based on which process mining techniques
provide insights regarding the underlying real-life business processes. in partic-
ular, the sap erp system has a signicant share in the erp market (22.5%
in 2017, gartner). extracting data from an sap erp system is particularlyarxiv:2110.03467v1  [cs.db]  7 oct 2021challenging as it involves many dierent tables/objects. due to its complexity,
support to extracting event data from the sap erp system has only been limited
to commercial vendors, e.g., celonis and processgold, which requires extensive
interaction with domain experts. moreover, the logs extracted by such extractors
suer from convergence/divergence problems [ 1]. this is due to the necessity to
specify a case notion . a case notion is a criteria to group events that belongs to
the same execution of a business process. in erp systems, dierent case notions
can be used for the same data. for example, in a procure-to-pay process, we
could specify as case notion the order, the single item of the order, the delivery,
the invoice, or the payment.
this paper proposes a novel approach to guide and ease the extraction of
event logs from sap erp. the approach consists of two phases, i.e., 1) building
graph of relations and 2) extracting object-centric event logs. we propose to use
object-centric event logs (ocel) as intermediate storage to collect the events
extracted from dierent tables. ocel does not require the specication of a case
notion. therefore, it provides exible and comprehensive event data extraction.
ocel can be used with object-centric process mining (ocpm) techniques
or attened to traditional event logs by selecting a case notion out of objects.
the proposed approach has been implemented as a prototypical extractor and
evaluated using an sap erp system.
the rest of the paper is organized as follows. section 2 presents some back-
ground knowledge. section 3 presents the proposed approach. section 4 presents
a prototypal software implementing the ideas proposed in this paper. section 5
evaluates the processes extracted by the prototypal software on top of an edu-
cational sap instance. section 6 presents the related work on extracting and
analyzing event logs from sap.
2 background
this section presents some background knowledge on ocel, convergence/diver-
gence problems, and sap systems.
2.1 object-centric event logs
traditional event logs in process mining have events associated with a single
case/process execution. these event logs, extracted from information systems,
suer from convergence/divergence problems [ 1]. we have a convergence problem
when the same event is duplicated among dierent instances. this happens, for
example, in an order-to-cash process, when item is considered as the case notion,
and an event of order creation can be associated with several items. we have a
divergence problem when several instances of the same activity happen in a case
while not being causally related. this happens, for example, in an order-to-cash
process, when order is considered as the case notion, and several instances of the
same item-related activity are contained in the same order.
ocel relax the assumption that an event is associated with a single case.
instead, in an ocel an event can be related to several objects, where everyobject is associated with a type. this results in a more natural way to extract
event data from a modern information system. for example, in erp systems,
the event of order creation can currently involve an order document and several
items. this resolves the convergence problem (since we do not need to duplicate
the events anymore) and the divergence problems (since activities related to
items of an order are not associated with the case of the general order).
recently, the ocel standard3has been proposed as the mainstream format
for storing object-centric event logs [ 5]. the format is supported by dierent im-
plementations and libraries in various programming languages, e.g., java (prom
framework) and python. ocel can be used to discover object-centric process
models [ 2,3], which describe the lifecycle of dierent object types and their interac-
tions. moreover, conformance checking can be done on multiple object types [ 2].
2.2 sap: entities and relationships
fig. 1: core entities of sap erp systems in uml 2.0 class diagram
in a broader sense, sap erp can be seen as a document management system.
therefore the concept of document is particularly important. fig. 1 introduces
the document and its relevant entities and relationships among them, using uml
2.0 class diagram. first, a document represents a core business object, including
orders, deliveries, and payments. each document contains a master item and
detail items . for instance, a delivery document contains a delivery master item,
corresponding to an order, and multiple delivery detail items, corresponding to
materials in the order. a master table is a collection of the same type of master
items, whereas a detail table is a collection of the same type of detail items. for
3http://www.ocel-standard.org/instance, ekko as a master table contains purchase order master items. ekpo
as a detail table contains purchase orders detail items.
both master and detail items contain a various number of attribute values , e.g.,
the total cost of a document or the cost of a single item. each attribute belongs
to a domain that encodes the type of information reported by the attribute, e.g.,
creation date and posting date of a document share the same domain because
they are both dates.
3 extracting event data from sap erp: approach
figure 2 describes an overview of our proposed approach to extract ocel from
sap erp systems. it consists of two phases: 1) building graph of relations
(gor) and 2) extracting ocel. the former aims to construct a graph that
describes all relevant tables of a business process. there are well-known business
processes in sap erp, e.g., purchase to pay (p2p) and order to cash (o2c).
for such business processes, target tables, where we extract event data regarding
the process, are already known, e.g., ekko ,rbkp ,ekbe for p2p and vbak ,
bkpf for o2c. however, most business processes in an organization are mostly
unknown and, thus, require the identication of relevant tables.
based on the gor, we extract ocel by connecting them to the underlying
database of sap erp systems. to this end, we rst preprocess records of tables
described in the gor. next, we dene activity concepts relevant to the target
business process using the relevant tables. finally, based on the activity concept,
we extract event data from the relevant tables.
fig. 2: overview of extracting object-centric event logs from sap erp systems3.1 building graphs of relations
figure 3 shows the conceptual model of three gors, each of which corresponds
to a business process. a gor is an undirected connected graph where the nodes
are sap tables containing the potentially interesting information and the edges
show a relation among two tables based on a joint eld/column. the node in the
center of a gor is a master table that is most relevant to the target process. the
distance of each node from the master table shows the relevancy of the information
contained in the corresponding table to the tables of interest and consequently
to the corresponding type of process. dierent colors in a gor indicate dierent
classes of tables. each class has a unique way of dening activity concepts. as
a result, dierent gors may be connected to each other. below are the steps to
construct gors:
joint tables
relations to external processes
direct connections between master tables
process type (ifit is known ) master table
p2p
o2c
unknownekko
vbak
xxx
……
vbak ekkoxxx
fig. 3: conceptual model of graph of relations (gors)selecting master tables a gor is built upon a master table relevant to a
business process to analyze. in this work, we consider relevant master tables as
users' input.
identifying relevant tables based on the given master table, we need to
identify relevant tables to the master tables. such tables become the candidates
for constructing the gor. three dierent main approaches may be taken: manual ,
automatic , and hybrid .
{in the manual approach, the identication is conducted by domain experts
who understand business processes and the technical details of sap systems.
in addition, the domain expert may provide a data schema to explain the
entities and relationships among them.
{in the automatic approach, the identication is made automatically by ex-
ploiting existing information in the system. for instance, using the table
dd03vv , one can extract the relationships between the tables.
{finally, the hybrid approach exploits both manual and automated techniques.
for instance, the data schema from domain experts can provide an initial set
of relevant tables, which will be improved by including more relevant tables
with the help of automatically generated relationships.
classifying tables the last step is the classication of the identied tables
into dierent classes. in the following, we describe ve dierent classes.
{aow table describes the status of objects that compose the target business
process. it explains the creation, deletion, and update of such objects, e.g.,
vbfa explains the status of objects that are associated with the order-to-
cash (o2c) process.
{atransaction table describes the execution of transactions (tcode) in sap
systems.
{achange table describes the changes in objects of the target business process,
e.g., cdhdr and cdpos are primary change tables.
{arecord table stores relevant attributes of objects of the target business
process, e.g., the table ekko contains the relevant attributes of purchase
order documents.
{adetail table stores the relationships between dierent entities, e.g., the table
ekpo stores the connection between purchase requisitions and purchase
orders.
3.2 extracting object-centric event logs
in this subsection, we explain how ocel are extracted using gors. the extrac-
tion consists of four main steps; pre-processing ,dening activity concept ,dening
object types and connecting entries .pre-processing sap tables contain a lot of data related to dierent companies
or groups in the same company (multi-tenant system). moreover, when invoic-
ing/accounting tables are considered, documents are organized by their scal
year. a pre-processing step must be performed to extract an event log of reason-
able size, containing the desired behavior and a coherent set of information since
document identiers can be replicated across dierent organizations. to this end,
the union of all the elds in the primary keys of the tables is considered, and for
some of them, a ltering query is executed, e.g., on a specic company code or a
specic scal year.
dening object types during the extraction, the entries of the master tables
are transformed into events, having the columns as event attributes. moreover,
the values of all the columns except the dates and the numbers become objects
of the object type given by the column's name.
dening activity concept to extract event data from gors, we take a
divide-and-conquer approach. we rst extract event data from each table and
then combine them. the rst step of extracting event data from each table is
to dene the activity concept. in the following, we explain how the activity is
dened in each class of tables.
{each row in ow tables contains a current document number, a previous
document number, the type of the current document, and the type of the
previous document. for instance, considering vbeln as the domain, vbeln,
vbelv, vbtyp n, and vbtyp v in the vbfa table contain respectively
the current document number, the previous document number and the current
and previous document types. we dene activities as the type of the current
documents, i.e., the value in vbtyp n.
{each row in transaction tables contains a transaction code. we transform the
transaction code into human-readable formats using the tstct table, e.g.,
va02 is transformed to change order, which becomes the activity name.
{each row in record tables describes the properties of an object. all the rows of
the record tables are associated with the same activity, e.g., create document
[...]for all the rows in ekko.
{for change tables, we suggest three approaches: (1) transaction codes used
for changes are transformed into activities, (2) fields, updated after changes,
are converted into activities, e.g., price changed , and (3) we consider both
old and new elds' values and dene activities, e.g., postpone delivery , by
comparing old and new values of delivery dates.
connecting entries in this step, the information of the detail tables is used
to enrich events. for example, if an entry of the table rseg, containing detailed
information about invoices, associates an invoice identier with an order identier,
every event associated with the invoice identier is also associated with the order
identier in the subsequent step.fig. 4: a gor built on our sap ides instance on the p2p process. detail tables are
colored by green, rkpf that is an additional record tables is colored by pink, and
rbkp and bkpf that are additional transaction tables are colored by yellow.
4 extracting event data from sap erp: tool
we implemented a tool in the python3 language, available in the github reposi-
tory; https://github.com/javert899/sap-extractor . the tool is available as
a web application implemented using the flask framework and can be launched
with the command; python main.py . the web application can be accessed at
the address; http://localhost:5000/new_extractor.html . first, the extrac-
tor asks the parameters of connection to the database supporting the sap erp
instance. then, it provides both a list of object classes contained in the database
and a list of pre-congured sets of tables related to the mainstream processes.
the next step is the construction of the gor, which permits extending the set of
tables. the following step is about pre-providing the values for the primary keys
of the included tables, e.g., the client used during the connection and the scal
year. after this step, the identication of the type of tables and the extraction
occurs, which permits obtaining an ocel, that can be attened to a traditional
event log or analyzed using object-centric techniques such as the ones provided
inhttps://github.com/javert899/sap-extractor .
5 assessment
this section proposes an assessment of the proposed techniques on top of an sap
erp ides system. in particular, we will target the extraction of the well-known
purchase to pay (p2p) system. a p2p process involves dierent steps including
approval of a purchase requisition ,placement of a purchase order ,invoicing from
a supplier , and payment . therefore, it involves dierent tables in the sap system.
5.1 building a graph of relations
selecting master tables the rst step in the tool is selecting a candidate
table related to the process. in this case, we start from ekko that is one of the
main tables in the p2p process and contains the master information. in building
the gor, represented in fig. 4, several other tables that are connected to ekkoare found. given the vast number of tables contained in sap, we applied a simple
ltering based on the number of entries in each table to show the main nodes in
the gor.
identifying relevant tables figure 4 shows other tables containing event
data meaningful to extract an event log for the p2p4. the user needs to specify
the tables to include along with the original set of tables. the gor is therefore
updated5. in our implementation, the master tables related to the detail tables
are automatically included in the set6.
classifying tables the tool needs to categorize the tables in the set between
master tables and detail tables, as the master tables contain event data, while
detail tables contain the connection between dierent entities:
{some tables are recognized as transactions tables: rbkp (containing the
transactions related to the invoices) and bkpf (containing the transaction
related to the payments).
{some tables are recognized as record tables: eban (in which a record is a
purchase requisition), ekko (in which a record is an order document), and
rkpf (in which a record is a reservation).
{some tables are recognised as detail tables: ekpo ,ekpa ,eket ,ekbe ,
bseg ,rseg ,resb7.
5.2 extracting object-centric event logs
in this section, we will explain the main steps of the log extraction process,
including the denition of the object types and the activity concept for the
extraction, and the connection between the entries given the information of the
detail tables. since we did not perform a pre-processing step, we will not assess
the step here.
4including ekbe, containing goods/invoice receipts, bseg, containing detail table
for payments, rseg, containing detail data for invoices, rkpf, including inventory
management data, ekpo, containing the detailed information about the purchase
orders, ekpa, containing the partner roles in purchasing, and eket, containing
the scheduling agreement. we can see that the eban table, containing purchase
requisition data, has not been included because of the ltering applied on the number
of entries. however, it would be found by the method if the threshold is set to a lower
value so that we will include it in the following steps.
5the set of tables to extract include: ekko, ekpo, ekpa, eket, ekbe, bseg,
bkpf, rseg, rbkp, rkpf, resb, eban.
6this means that bkpf, the master table of bseg, containing the master data about
the payments, and rbkp, the master table of rseg, containing the master data
about the invoices, are included.
7because their primary key is contained in the primary key of ekko (for ekpo,
ekpa, eket, ekbe), bkpf ,rbkp andrkpf respectively.dening object types starting from the choices on the gor and the iden-
tication of the type of tables, it is possible to extract dierent object types,
including banfn-banfn (purchase requisition), infnr-infnr (purchasing
record), ebeln-ebeln (purchase order), belnr-re belrn (the invoice
number), belnr-belnr d(the payment number), and awkey-awkey (a
generic object type containing the id of the object in sap).
dening activity concept the activity concept is dened as follows:
{for the record tables, a unique activity is dened for all the events, that
iscreate document (tabname) (where tabname is the name of the
corresponding record table, so it can be eban/ekko/rkpf).
{for the transaction tables, the activity is given by the transaction code8.
mainstream transactions occurring are enter incoming invoice ,enter incom-
ing payment ,enter outgoing payment .
connecting entries the detail tables are used to enrich the entries extracted
from the master tables as follows:
{bseg provides a connection from the payments to the purchase order items.
{rseg connects the invoices to the purchase order items.
{ekpo provides a connection of the purchase order items to the corresponding
purchase requisition.
{ekpa and eket contain detailed information that does not provide mean-
ingful links to other tables in the set. ekbe is a peculiar type of detail table,
as it contains the information about goods/invoice receipts, so it could be
seen as a master table. still, it also links the purchase order items with the
invoices through the goods/invoice receipts.
6 related work
this section presents the related work on data extraction from erp systems for
process mining purposes.
data extraction and pre-processing from sap erp in [6], an approach
to extract traditional event logs from sap erp is proposed. the set of relevant
business objects is identied, and the related tables and their relations are iden-
tied. a limitation is that the construction of the document ow is manual. in
[7], the authors address the pre-processing challenges to extract event logs from
sap erp by using tools such as evs model builder. in [ 4], an ontology-driven
approach for the extraction of event logs from relational databases is proposed,
in which the user can express semantic queries which are then translated to rela-
tional queries. in [ 8], the eects of some decisions on the quality of the resulting
event log are analyzed. in particular, the context of event log extraction from
erp system is considered.
8using the description of the transaction contained in the table tstct.artifact-centric models on erp systems in [10], an approach to discover
artifact-centric models from erp systems is proposed. the approach is split into
two main parts: 1) identifying a set of artifacts, extracting a traditional event
log, and a model of its lifecycle; 2) discovering the interactions between artifacts.
the set of tables to extract needs to be decided by the user and the specication
of the activity concepts is not described in this work.
in [9], object-centric event logs (in the xoc format) are extracted from the
dollibar erp system. these logs have been used to generate an object-centric
behavioral constraints (ocbc) model. however, ocbc/xoc are not scalable.
openslex meta-models in [11], a meta-model is proposed to ease the ex-
traction of process mining event logs from information systems supported by
relational databases. the instances of the openslex meta-model can be built
from dierent types of database logs (redo logs, sap change tables). hence, the
meta-model is generic and not tailored to the peculiar features of an sap erp
system. the main problem is that the extraction of an event log requires a case
notion's specication, which leads to convergence/divergence problems.
enterprise-grade connectors several commercial vendors of process mining
solutions oer enterprise-grade connectors to sap, that are able to ingest and
process millions of events. notable examples in the current landscape are celonis9,
signavio10, lana11, uipath12.
7 conclusion
in this paper, we proposed a generic approach to extract event logs from sap
erp, which exploits the relationships between tables in sap to build graphs of
relations (gors) and obtains object-centric event logs (ocel) using gors.
figure 2 summarizes our approach. by storing extracted event data into ocel,
we permit the specication of multiple case notions, avoiding the convergence/-
divergence problems and simplifying the extraction process. an open-source tool
implementing the approach and a case study on an educational sap instance
have been presented, showing the feasibility of identifying the relationships be-
tween dierent tables of the p2p process and extracting corresponding ocel.
as future work, we plan to deploy our approach on dierent instances of sap
systems running in real businesses to explore the connection between gors and
underlying processes and to discover unknown processes. moreover, we should
further assess how good the extraction of a typical sap process is in comparison
to commercial-grade extractors.
9https://www.celonis.com/solutions/systems/sap
10https://www.signavio.com/products/process-intelligence/
11https://lanalabs.com/en/migration-to-sap-s-4-hana-with-lana/
12https://docs.uipath.com/process-mining/docs/introduction-to-sap-connectorreferences
1. van der aalst, w.m.: object-centric process mining: dealing with divergence and
convergence in event data. in: international conference on software engineering
and formal methods. pp. 3{25. springer (2019)
2.van der aalst, w.m., berti, a.: discovering object-centric petri nets. fundamenta
informaticae 175(1-4), 1{40 (2020)
3.berti, a., van der aalst, w.m.: extracting multiple viewpoint models from relational
databases. in: 8th international symposium on data-driven process discovery and
analysis (simpda). pp. 24{51. springer international publishing (2018)
4.calvanese, d., montali, m., syamsiyah, a., van der aalst, w.m.p.: ontology-driven
extraction of event logs from relational databases. in: reichert, m., reijers, h.a.
(eds.) business process management workshops - bpm 2015, 13th international
workshops, innsbruck, austria, august 31 - september 3, 2015, revised papers.
lecture notes in business information processing, vol. 256, pp. 140{153. springer
(2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-42887-1 12,https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-42887-1_12
5.ghahfarokhi, a.f., park, g., berti, a., van der aalst, w.m.p.: ocel: a standard
for object-centric event logs. in: bellatreche, l., dumas, m., karras, p., matulevicius,
r., awad, a., weidlich, m., ivanovic, m., hartig, o. (eds.) new trends in database
and information systems. vol. 1450, pp. 169{175. springer (2021)
6.van giessel, m.: process mining in sap r/3: a method for applying process mining to
sap r/3. eindhoven university of technology, eindhoven, the netherlands (2004)
7.ingvaldsen, j.e., gulla, j.a.: preprocessing support for large scale process mining
of sap transactions. in: international conference on business process management.
pp. 30{41. springer (2007)
8.jans, m., soer, p.: from relational database to event log: decisions with qual-
ity impact. in: teniente, e., weidlich, m. (eds.) business process management
workshops - bpm 2017 international workshops, barcelona, spain, september
10-11, 2017, revised papers. lecture notes in business information processing,
vol. 308, pp. 588{599. springer (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-74030-
046,https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-74030-0_46
9.li, g., de murillas, e.g.l., de carvalho, r.m., van der aalst, w.m.: extracting
object-centric event logs to support process mining on databases. in: international
conference on advanced information systems engineering. pp. 182{199. springer
(2018)
10.lu, x., nagelkerke, m., van de wiel, d., fahland, d.: discovering interacting
artifacts from erp systems. ieee transactions on services computing 8(6), 861{
873 (2015)
11.de murillas, e.g.l., van der aalst, w.m., reijers, h.a.: process mining on databases:
unearthing historical data from redo logs. in: international conference on business
process management. pp. 367{385. springer (2016)
12.van eck, m.l., lu, x., leemans, s.j., van der aalst, w.m.: pm2: a process min-
ing project methodology. in: international conference on advanced information
systems engineering. pp. 297{313. springer (2015)