interview i n the 2021 gartner market guide for process mining, research note g00737056. www.gartner.com, 2021.  
 
interview with prof.dr.ir. wil van der aa lst, lehrstuhl für informatik 9 -  
process and data science, rwth aachen university  
 
what are the main changes in the  process mining  space?  
“the adoption of process  mining continues to increase. in countries like germany and the 
netherlands , most of the larger companies are already using process mining. each year the 
process mining market increases by  50% or more. there are currently around 40  process mining 
vendors. at the same time, there were some mergers. for example, sap acquired signavio, ibm 
acquired myinvenio, and appian acquired lana labs. this shows that many of the larger 
software vendors now see the importance of process mining. wit h process mining being 
integrated into  different platforms, the threshold to use process  mining  gets much lower. for 
example, there are at least five process mining tools that build on power bi. in terms of process 
mining capabilities , the focus is shiftin g from discover ing simple directly follows graphs (dfgs) 
to more advanced capabilities like conformance checking, prediction, and simulation using richer 
languages like the business process model and notation (bpmn) . an important development is 
also the integration of process mining and automation platforms.  by using process mining, 
execution gaps are identified while automatically triggering corrective workflows. this  is a natural 
development . process mining provides the x -rays to spot performance and compliance problems. 
however, after diagnosing these  problems, one also needs to "operate", i.e., take the actions to 
address the execution gaps uncovered. therefore, process modeling, process analysis, and process execution need to be integrated. the attention for topics like hyperautomation and 
execution management illustrates this."  
what are examples of new process mining capabilities that will become important in the 
next couple of years?  
“although process mining vendo rs already offer machine learning (ml) capabilities and often 
refer to artificial intelligence (ai), the actual practical use is very limited. this has two reasons. 
the first reason is that , in many organizations , there is so much collective debt that ml and ai 
approaches are not needed and also do not work. as long as organizations have data integration 
problems, they should not start with ml/ai. traditional process mining approaches like process discovery and conformance checking will reveal many improvement opportunities. sophis ticated 
forward- looking process mining techniques (e.g., using ml to predict delays and deviations)  only 
make sense after taking care of the obvious. moreover, these techniques only work i f there are 
enough data and processes are in steady -state. i often a dvocate hybrid intelligence (hi) as the 
more realistic alternative. hence, i'm s keptical about fully automated ml/ai.  
for me , a much more exciting development is the emergence of object -centric process mining 
(ocpm). this is more down- to-earth, but very im portant for future process mining applications. 
most process mining tools still assume that there is a single case identifier . however, one event 
may refer to multiple objects (e.g., an order, a customer, multiple items, and a location). picking a 
particul ar case notion quickly leads to convergence and divergence problems , and the connection 
between objects gets lost. take,  for example, a look at the database tables used to analy ze 
purchase- to-pay (p2p) or order -to-cash (o2c) processes. t hese t ables are con nected through 
foreign keys showing that one order may have multiple items and that a delivery may contain 
items of multiple orders.  as the field matures , ocpm will become more important.  organizations 
do not want to spend efforts on the repeated extracti on of events to answer specific questions. " how did the covid pandemic influence the adoption of process mining?  
“due to the covid pandemic , many organizations cut budgets for innovation and people were 
busy keeping the daily operational processes up and running. however,  covid -19 was also an 
enabler of digitalization initiatives. many decisions that would normally take years took place in a 
matter of weeks, e.g., replacing paper forms with  electronic forms. the pandemic exposed 
inefficiencies and outdated work practices. in the long run,  these  experiences will be a catalyst for 
process mining adoption.  the pandemic  also showed the limitations of mainstream  ml/ai 
technologies. in times of disruption, "training data" are not representative of the actual behavior  of 
people and organizations.  however, process mining can still provide valuable insights when 
things change dramatically.  moreover, the resilience of processes will be a topic in the 
boardrooms of most organizat ions."  
how many process- mining vendors will there  be in  2025?  
"the number of process mining vendors has been steadily growing. now there are around 40 
commercial process -mining  tools. some of the current  vendors will be acquired by larger vendors 
and their process mining capabilities will be added to existing platforms and systems.  basic 
process mining capabilities (e.g., creating a dfg with frequency and time information) will be added to existing systems (e.g., rpa and bpm software). also new , domain spec ific, vendors 
(e.g., targeting production or healthcare)  will emerge. however, it will be increasingly difficult to 
compete with the leading vendors of the high- end process mining tools that are able to deal with 
billions of events. hence, it is difficult to estimate the exact number of process mining vendors  in 
2025. however, it is clear that the market will continue to grow, and the diversity of tools supporting process mining will increase."  
can you tell more about hybrid intelligence?  
"hybrid intelligence (hi), sometimes also called augmented intelligence, emphasizes the 
assistive role of new data- driven technologies. for example, deep neural nets are there to 
enhance human intelligence rather than to replace it (just like telescopes are there to enhance 
human vision). hi aims to combine human and artificial intelligence, thereby reaching superior 
results to those each of them could have accomplished separately  while learning continuously. hi 
aims to combine the best of both worlds. the spectacular developments in ml have extended the reach of software and har dware robots. once a robot is able to perform a repetitive task at a 
similar level of quality, it is often also more cost -effective.  however, humans still have unique 
capabilities. consider, for example, disruptive events like the covid -19 pandemic , where one is 
confronted with completely new challenges that require flexibility, creativity, and intuition. people 
have the ability to transfer experiences from one problem domain to another. moreover, empathy 
(i.e., the capacity to understand or feel what another person is experiencing) and ethics (i.e., 
reasoning about moral concepts such as good and evil, right and wrong, virtue and v ice, justice 
and crime) require hi.  
hi also plays a key role in action -oriented process mining (aopm) , which focuses on automated 
correcti ve actions based on  process mining diagnostics . aopm turns observed events into 
management actions when needed. the goal is not to support the operational process itself (that already exists in some form), but to support the management of the process.  obviously, hi will 
play a significant role in aopm. humans need to be in the loop when confronted with 
unprecedented situations. for example, it may be beneficial to be non- compliant when novel 
problems emerge. this is what we have learned in the l ast two years."  