pc4pm: a tool for privacy/confidentiality
preservation in process mining
majid rafiei, alexander schnitzler and wil m.p. van der aalst
chair of process and data science, rwth aachen university, aachen, germany
abstract
process mining enables business owners to discover and analyze their actual processes using event
data that are widely available in information systems. event data contain detailed information which
is incredibly valuable for providing insights. however, such detailed data often include highly confi-
dential and private information. thus, concerns of privacy and confidentiality in process mining are
becoming increasingly relevant and new techniques are being introduced. to make the techniques eas-
ily accessible, new tools need to be developed to integrate the introduced techniques and direct users to
appropriate solutions based on their needs. in this paper, we present a python-based infrastructure im-
plementing and integrating state-of-the-art privacy/confidentiality preservation techniques in process
mining. our tool provides an easy-to-use web-based user interface for privacy-preserving data publish-
ing, risk analysis, and data utility analysis. the tool also provides a set of anonymization operations
that can be utilized to support privacy/confidentiality preservation. the tool manages both standard
xes event logs and non-standard event data. we also store and manage privacy metadata to track the
changes made by privacy/confidentiality preservation techniques.
keywords
process mining, privacy preservation, confidentiality, event data
1. introduction
process mining techniques employ event logs to provide insights into actual processes [ 1].
event logs contain detailed information about operational processes and can be extracted from
various types of information systems, e.g., epr systems. events are considered as the smallest
units of process execution which are distinguished by their attributes. the main attributes of
events are as follows: activity ,case id ,timestamp , and resource . for instance, a heart surgery
(activity ) performed by dr. john ( resource ) for a patient with id=10 ( case id ) at timestamp
2021.06.10-10:00:00 is an event recorded by an information system in a hospital. the attributes
that directly or indirectly refer to individuals raise privacy concerns. for example, in the
healthcare context, the case id attribute may refer to the patients whose data are processed, and
theresource attribute may refer to the employees who perform activities for the patients, e.g.,
nurses. furthermore, other attributes can also be considered as confidential information, e.g.,
proceedings of the demonstration & resources track, best bpm dissertation award, and doctoral consortium at bpm
2021 co-located with the 19th international conference on business process management, bpm 2021, rome, italy,
september 6-10, 2021
/envelope-openmajid.rafiei@pads.rwth-aachen.de (m. rafiei); alexander.schnitzler@outlook.com (a. schnitzler);
wvdaalst@pads.rwth-aachen.de (w. m.p. v. d. aalst)
/orcid0000-0001-7161-6927 (m. rafiei); 0000-0002-8223-6097 (a. schnitzler); 0000-0002-0955-6940 (w. m.p. v. d. aalst)
©2021 copyright for this paper by its authors. use permitted under creative commons license attribution 4.0 international (cc by 4.0).
ceur
workshop
proceedingshttp://ceur-ws.org
issn 1613-0073
ceur workshop proceedings (ceur-ws.org)theactivity attribute may contain a confidential activity name that must not be exposed. respect
for privacy when analyzing personal data is also dictated by regulations, e.g., the european
general data protection regulation (gdpr)1. such legitimate and ethical requirements have
recently resulted in more attention to privacy and confidentiality issues in process mining
[2,3,4,5]. some tools have also been introduced to provide specific privacy/confidentiality
requirements [6, 7, 8].
figure 1: the general overview of privacy-
related activities in process mining.figure 1 shows the general overview of
privacy-related activities in process mining
including privacy-preserving data publishing
(ppdp), privacy-preserving process mining
(pppm), and privacy analysis (pran). ppdp
tries to obscure the identity and/or sensi-
tive data of individuals to preserve their pri-
vacy. ppdp techniques often apply one or
more anonymization operations , e.g., suppres-
sion,generalization , etc., to provide the de-
sired privacy requirements. pppm intends
to expand existing process mining algorithms
to cope with intermediate results, so-called
abstractions [9], generated by some ppdp
techniques. note that pppm algorithms are
closely linked with the corresponding ppdp
approaches, and pppm may refer to the entire
privatization process, starting with an event
log and finishing with process mining findings. pran, indicated with dashed lines in figure 1,
includes two types of activities: risk analysis andutility analysis . both pran activities could be
done for data and results. in this paper, we introduce a tool, named pc4pm, mainly focusing on
the activities indicated by the check-boxes in figure 1. pc4pm is the successor of the privacy
tool introduced in [ 7], and it offers new privacy preservation techniques, privacy analysis, a
set of anonymization operations, and user guidance that directs users to the right techniques
based on their requirements. in the rest of the paper, we demonstrate the functionality and
characteristics of pc4pm. we also describe the maturity and availability of the tool.
2. functionality and characteristics
pc4pm is implemented in python using django framework2. figure 2 shows a high-level view
of the architecture. pc4pm includes eight main django applications and each application pro-
vides at least one main privacy-related activity implemented as a python package. the django
templates, accessible from any web browser, provide a web interface for the applications. imple-
menting each technique as an independent django application enables users to simultaneously
run different techniques on event logs. such architecture makes the process of maintenance and
1http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj
2https://www.djangoproject.com/integration simple. to integrate new techniques, one can create a python package and integrate
it as an independent application. moreover, python packages can independently be imported
into other python-based tools.
figure 2: the architecture of pc4pm.figure 3 shows the home page of pc4pm. the left
menu shows the main django applications includ-
ingevent data management ,privacy-aware role min-
ing,connector method ,tlkc-privacy ,tlkc-privacy ex-
tended ,anonymization operations ,pripel , and privacy
analysis . the event data management application man-
ages both standard xes event logs and non-standard
event data, called event log abstraction [9]. the privacy-
aware role mining application implements the decom-
position method, proposed in [ 10], to discover roles
from event logs while preserving privacy. this method
perturbs the frequency of activities in an event log to
eliminate frequency-based attacks. the connector method is an encryption-based method for
securely discovering directly follows graphs from event logs. this method breaks down traces
into a collection of directly follows relations to prevent linkage attacks.
figure 3: the home page of pc4pm.the tlkc-privacy application imple-
ments the tlkc-privacy model provid-
ing group-based privacy guarantees for
process discovery and performance anal-
ysis. the tlkc-privacy extended appli-
cation extends the tlkc-privacy model
and considers all the main perspectives
of process mining [ 3]. the anonymiza-
tion operation application, implements
all the main anonymization operations
proposed in [ 9] including suppression ,ad-
dition ,substitution ,condensation ,swap-
ping,generalization , and cryptography .
the pripel application presents the
pripel method [ 2] which applies the no-
tion of differential privacy to provide pri-
vacy guarantees for event logs. the privacy analysis application includes three components for
analyzing disclosure risks ,data utility [11], and fcb-anonymity [12].
pc4pm supports users with a four-step user guide to help them choose the right technique(s)
based on their needs. the user guidance works based on a four-dimension signature assigned to
each technique. the signature reflects the following aspects: process mining perspective (pmps),
process mining activity (pmac), privacy perspective (prps), and privacy activity (prac). pmps
indicates the process mining perspective that a privacy technique focuses on, e.g., control-flow.
pmac shows the process mining activity, e.g, process discovery, for which the utility of event
data is preserved. prps shows the privacy perspective of a privacy technique, i.e., resource
or case. prac indicates the main privacy-related activity of a privacy preservation technique,i.e., ppdp, pppm, or pran. moreover, pc4pm helps users with help tooltips provided for the
parameters used by techniques. pc4pm also inherits all the characteristics of its predecessor [ 7].
some of those are as follows: (1) each django application provides the results in an independent
output section, (2) it enables a cycle of privacy/confidentiality preservation techniques such
that the results from one technique can be added to the event data repository and used as an
input for other techniques, (3) the privacy metadata [9] which specify the order and type of
the main anonymization operations are added to anonymized event logs.
3. availability and maturity
the source code, a screencast, a user manual, and all other resources are available in our
github repository: https://github.com/m4jidrafiei/pc4pm. each privacy/confidentiality python
package is linked to a separate github project. the main github project contains links to all
those projects. in the corresponding github project of each privacy/confidentiality python
package, one can find the name of the python package, the link to the main paper, and a sample
source code that shows the usage. in terms of performance and time complexity, each privacy
preservation technique which is linked to a django application behaves differently w.r.t. the size
of the input event log. based on our experiments, the applications are able to handle real-world
event logs, e.g., bpi challenge datasets: https://data.4tu.nl/. moreover, all the complicated and
time-consuming functions, developed in the python packages, have a parameter to be run
using multi-processing which is enabled by default. in this case, the input event log is divided
into smaller pieces w.r.t. the cores of the processor hosting pc4pm. pc4pm is provided as a
docker container that can simply be hosted by users: https://hub.docker.com/r/m4jid/pc4pm.
the docker usage is also explained in the github repository.
4. conclusion
in this paper, we introduced a tool for publishing event data w.r.t. privacy concerns. our web-
based tool is mainly focused on privacy-/confidentiality-preserving data publishing and privacy
analysis considering both data utility and disclosure risk analyses. pc4pm can be considered as
a sanitizer that provides sanitized event logs that can be used by any process mining tool. the
architecture has been designed in such a way that other privacy preservation techniques can
easily be integrated, e.g., we integrated pripel as an external library. the goal of pc4pm is
to provide a comprehensive set of techniques that can cover all the aspects of privacy-related
activities for different perspectives of process mining. we invite other researchers to integrate
their solutions as independent applications into the provided framework.
acknowledgments
funded under the excellence strategy of the federal government and the länder. we also thank
the alexander von humboldt (avh) stiftung for supporting our research.references
[1]w. m. p. van der aalst, process mining - data science in action, second edition, springer,
2016. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-49851-4 .
[2]s. a. fahrenkrog-petersen, h. van der aa, m. weidlich, pripel: privacy-preserving event
log publishing including contextual information, in: business process management - 18th
international conference, bpm, volume 12168 of lecture notes in computer science , 2020,
pp. 111–128.
[3]m. rafiei, w. m. p. van der aalst, group-based privacy preservation techniques for process
mining, data & knowledge engineering 134 (2021) 101908. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.datak.2021.101908 .
[4]g. elkoumy, s. a. fahrenkrog-petersen, m. f. sani, a. koschmider, f. mannhardt, s. n.
von voigt, m. rafiei, l. von waldthausen, privacy and confidentiality in process mining -
threats and research challenges, corr abs/2106.00388 (2021). url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2106.00388. arxiv:2106.00388 .
[5]g. elkoumy, s. a. fahrenkrog-petersen, m. dumas, p. laud, a. pankova, m. weidlich,
secure multi-party computation for inter-organizational process mining, in: enterprise,
business-process and information systems modeling - 21st international conference,
bpmds, springer, 2020.
[6]g. elkoumy, s. a. fahrenkrog-petersen, m. dumas, p. laud, a. pankova, m. weidlich,
shareprom: a tool for privacy-preserving inter-organizational process mining, in: pro-
ceedings of the best dissertation award, doctoral consortium, and demonstration &
resources track at bpm 2020, volume 2673 of ceur workshop proceedings , ceur-ws.org,
2020, pp. 72–76.
[7]m. rafiei, w. m. p. van der aalst, practical aspect of privacy-preserving data publishing in
process mining, in: proceedings of the best dissertation award, doctoral consortium,
and demonstration & resources track at bpm 2020 co-located with the 18th international
conference on business process management (bpm 2020), ceur-ws.org, 2020.
[8]m. bauer, s. a. fahrenkrog-petersen, a. koschmider, f. mannhardt, h. van der aa, m. wei-
dlich, elpaas: event log privacy as a service, in: proceedings of the dissertation award,
doctoral consortium, and demonstration track at bpm 2019, 2019.
[9]m. rafiei, w. m. p. van der aalst, privacy-preserving data publishing in process mining,
in: business process management forum - bpm forum 2020, seville, spain, september
13-18, 2020, proceedings, volume 392 of lecture notes in business information processing ,
springer, 2020, pp. 122–138. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-58638-6\_8 .
[10] m. rafiei, w. m. p. van der aalst, mining roles from event logs while preserving privacy, in:
business process management workshops - bpm 2019 international workshops, vienna,
austria, 2019, pp. 676–689.
[11] m. rafiei, w. m. p. van der aalst, towards quantifying privacy in process mining, in:
international conference on process mining - icpm 2020 international workshops, padua,
italy, october 4-9, 2020, 2020.
[12] m. rafiei, w. m. p. van der aalst, privacy-preserving continuous event data publishing,
corr abs/2105.11991 (2021). url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.11991. arxiv:2105.11991 .