resilient digital twins  
organizations need to prepare for the unexpected  
authors:  
wil m. p. van der aalst  
rwth aachen  
lehrstuhl für informatik 9  
ahornstr. 55, 52056 aachen, germany  
wvdaalst@pads.rwth -aachen.de   
 
oliver hinz  
goethe university frankfurt  
faculty of economics and business administration  
theodor -w.-adorno -platz 4, 60323 frankfurt am main, germany  
ohinz@wiwi.uni -frankfurt.de  
christof weinhardt  (corresponding)  
karlsruhe institute of technology (kit)  
institute of information systems and marketing (iism)  
kaiserstr. 89 -93, 7613 3 karlsruhe, germany  
weinhardt@kit.edu  
1. learning from data in times of disruption  
currently, we can witness contradict ory expectations when it comes to it.  on the one hand, there is 
the belief that artificial intelligence (ai) and machine learning (ml) will solve  most  problem s because 
of the abundance of data  and sophisticated algorithms  (lecun, bengio, and hinton 2015) . on the other 
hand, the covid -19 pandemic and rapid climate changes (e.g. , the floodings  in germany  in july 2021 ) 
show tha t neither ai nor ml can deal with  disruptions. when there  is a sudden dramatic change, 
predictive models will fail,  no matter how much data was there before. consider , for example , the 
impact of the covid -19 pandemic on supply chains. especially at the beginning of the global outbreak 
of covid -19 in march 2020, supply chains failed  because of unpredicted demand for certain products 
(e.g., masks and toilet paper) combined with  simultaneous restrictions for trav el, work, and business.  
we use ai/ml  to refer to machine intelligence , i.e., mixtures of artificial intelligence and machine 
learning. ai/ml can deal well with unstructured data (text, images, and video), but in times of 
disruption , the "training data" is  not representative of the actu al behavior of people and organizations .  
although current ai/ml technologies outperform humans in many areas, tasks requiring common 
sense, contextual knowledge, creativity, adaptivity, and empathy are still best performed b y humans  
(van der aalst 2021b) . in times of disruption , these aspects are essential . data -driven algorithms have 
difficulties dealing with contextual information and data -points that are off- the-scale . techniques for 
reinforcement learning can adapt automatically, but are too slow to respond to disruptions. techniques for "transfer learning " only work if there are sufficient similarities. hence, disruptions like 
covid -19 and large -scale flooding show the limitations of machine intelligence . 
does this mean that one should simply ignore data and models because they fail when things get 
tough? the answer is no for two reasons. the first reason is that if there is enough data and processes 
are in steady -state, ai/ml technologies tend to function well and can take over many duties from 
humans. the second reason is that also in times of disruption, humans still need data and models to 
make  good  decisions. during the covid -19 crisis, the importance of having reliable data became 
evident. data were often incomplete a nd unreliable, complicating decision -making  at all levels . the 
general data protection regulation (gdpr ) further delayed  actions in the european union . also, 
bureaucratic  processes that relied on paper forms failed.  actually , covid -19 helped to drive  digital 
transformation  by exposing pre -existing  problems . what would normally take years , now took only 
weeks. interestingly, also relatively simple models helped decision -makers (e.g.,  high -level statistical 
models  to predict the incidence of the coronav irus in the coming  weeks ). 
given these experiences, we advocate creating resilient digital twins . a digital twin is a virtual 
representation that serves as the real -time digital counterpart of something  that exists i n the non -
virtual (i.e., physical)  world  (e.g., a production system, machine, or organization). the digital 
counterpart should help to make decisions either manually or fully automatic. however, the digital 
twin should be resilient and not start making bad decisions when confronted with complete ly new  
situation s. hence, human intelligence needs to be part of a resilient digital twin. answers to "what -if 
analyses" need to be compared and interpreted.  
2. grand challenge: digital twin of an orga nization  (dto) 
digital twins have been used in many settin gs ranging from spacecraft and wind turbine simulations to 
chemical processes and urban planning. here , we focus on the digital twin of an organization  
(kerremans and kopcho 2019). however, we first provide a more abstract definition of a digital twin 
using figure 1 (van der aalst 2021a; fuller et al. 2020 ). 
reality
digital
modelreality
digital
shadowreality
digital
twinmanual /
offline
automatic /
real-time
(a) (b) (c)normal
reality
resilient digital
twin
(d)current 
reality
 
figure 1: the difference between a digital model (a), a digital shadow (b), a digital twin (c), and a resilient digital twin 
confronted with a disruption (d). visualization is based on (van der aalst 2021a).  
a digital model  is a reflection of reality that is create d manually , and functions  in an offline manner, 
i.e., the model does not change when reality changes. an example is the classical use of simulation 
tools like arena, anylogic, vensim, or simul8 modeling a production line  or supply chain . such a digital 
mod el can be used to reason about reality and answer what -if questions. a digital shadow  goes one 
step further. the model is now automatically derived and changes when reality changes. also , the digital shadow can be used to reason about reality and answer wh at-if questions. although the digital 
shadow is based on data tapped from reality, there is no automated  real- time feedback loop . the 
insights produced by the digital shadow do not automatically trigger changes. this is still done manually 
after interpreting the results. the internet of production (iop) developed at rwth aachen university 
provides collections of digital shadows supported by an infrastructure that is using ai/ml techniques 
with a focus on  process mining (van der aalst et al. 2021; liebenberg  and jarke 2020). a digital twin  
goes one step further. results of the digital twin directly impact reality. for example, when the 
simulation model predicts a delay, the production process is reconfigured automatically.  
the idea of a digital twin is appealing. in the virtual  world, all possible decisions can be evaluated 
without  causing harm, waste, and costs.  typically , stochastic models are used to cope with  
uncertainty. this explains why simulation tools play a crucial  role in the development of digital  twins. 
in selected application domains , it is already possible to create reliable digital twins that can 
automatically respond to behaviors observed in reality.  early examples of digital twins were relatively 
simple, focusing on a single physical thing (e .g., a wing of an airplane) . however, over time more 
complicated settings were considered.  as discussed in (fuller et al. 2020 ; kritzinger et al. 2018; 
caporuscio 2020 ), digital twins now play a key role in cyber- physical systems, industry 4.0, internet -of-
things, smart cities, aviation, energy, and healthcare. these successe s led to the idea of a digital twin 
of an organization (dto).  
although the term " digital twin of an organization " (dto) existed before, it only became a topic of 
discussion w hen gartner started to p romote  the concept a few years ago  (kerremans and kopcho 
2019) .  gartner uses  the following definition: "a digital twin of an organization (dto) is a dynamic 
software model of any organization that relies on operational and/or other  data to understand how 
an organization operationalizes its business model, connects with its current state, responds to 
changes, deploys resources and delivers exceptional customer value." creating a dto can be seen as 
one of the grand challenges  in infor mation systems.  
why is it so difficult to create a dto? there are two main reasons:  
• the boundaries  of an organization and , therefore, also a dto are not so clear, i.e., an 
organization has customers, suppliers, employees that collectively influence the processes.  
• human and organizational behavior may be irrational and change over time (influenced by 
regulations, social interactions, and personal preferences).  
for most organizations, it is not feasible to create a dto that captures reality well. however, the desire 
to model, visualize and understand the complex context in which an organ ization operates is 
understandable . on e can view process mining as a concrete technology to facilitate such a dto (van 
der aalst, 2016). using process discovery, one can dis cover the so -called "control- flow model" 
(represented using petri nets, process trees, or bpmn models) and by aligning event data and with the control -flow model, it is possible to add other perspectives (time, costs, resources,  decisions,  etc.). the 
resul ting more elaborate  model can be simulated  (van der aalst, 2016) . several process -mining tools 
provide such a simulation facility (e.g., prom, celonis, and apromore). also , business process modeling 
and simulation tools (e.g., signavio, aris , and simul8) a dded process -mining capabilities to 
automatically learn simulation models. using process mining, it is relatively easy to create a digital 
shadow (see figure 1(b)). however, due to the challenges mentioned before, it is extremely difficult to 
create a mode l that behaves like the real organization. also, multiple processes interact and compete 
for resources  concurrently . the importance of concurrency and multiple process notions is exposed  in (van der aalst 2021a).  hence, it is not enough to consider one process in isolation. moreover, to create 
a digital twin, as shown in figure 1(c), the dto also needs to automatically take action s. action -oriented 
process mining  provides initial steps for this. for example, the c elonis execution management system 
(ems) can trigger corrective workflows using the integromat integration platform.  
although process mining provides initial capabilities to create a dto, it is fair to say that dtos are more 
a vision rather than a reality.  moreover, to make dtos resilient, we need humans in the loop to cop e 
with disruptions.  this is illustrated in figure 1(d). as reality changes due to disruptions, the digital twin 
still needs to be useful for human decision -makers. in other words, we want the combination  to be 
resilient.  
3. resilience using hybrid intelligence  
in (losier et al. 2019), infrastructure digital twins are proposed to cope with natural disasters such as 
flood s, storms, fires, and earthquakes. strictly speaking, using the classificat ion in figure 1, the digital 
twins in (losier et al. 2019) are  actually  just digital models . decision -makers can play out different 
scenarios to see how to respond to different types of natural disasters. this cannot be handled by 
ai/ml because every disas ter is unique , and there are not enough representative training data. 
therefore, we advocate the use of hybrid intelligence  (van der aalst 2021b).  
hybrid intelligence (hi) , sometimes also called augmented intelligence , emphasizes the assistive role 
ai/ml, i.e., deep neural nets and other data -driven techniques are used to enhance human intelligence 
rather than replacing it.  dellermann et al. (2019) define hi as “the ability to achieve complex goals by combining human and artificial intelligence, thereby re aching superior results to those each of them 
could have accomplished separately, and continuously improve by learning from each other”.  
 
 
human intelligence
“people and experiences ”
• flexible
• creative
• emphatic
• instinctive 
• commonsensical
machine intelligence
“data and algorithms ”
• fast
• efficient
• cheap
• scalable 
• consistent
resilient
digital twin 
using hybrid 
intelligence
 
figure 2: positioning hybrid intelligence as the bridge connecting human intelligence and machine intelligence to  enable 
resilient digital twins, based on (van der aalst 2021b).  
figure 2 shows how hi combines two forms of intelligence: human intelligence  and machine 
intelligence  (i.e., ai/ml). human intelligenc e is about people and experiences and can be characterized 
by terms such as flexible , creative , emphatic, instinctive , and commonsensical . machine intelligence is about data and algorithms and can be characterized by terms such as fast , efficient , cheap, scalable , 
and consistent  (van der aalst 2021b).  
hi can help to make dtos more resilient to disruptions. people can more easily translate past 
experiences into actions in unseen contexts . instinct and common sense outperform automated 
reasoning when confront ed with unprecedented situations.  
4. relevance and opportunities for bise   
already in 2017, alphago zero, a go -playing computer developed by deepmind technologies, was 
able to defeat any human player by just playing games against itself. go  is just one of many tasks where 
human intelligence was outperformed by machine intelligence. numerous studies show that many 
jobs will disappear in the near future because of this (frey and osborne 2017; hawksworth et al. 2018). 
these developments are imp ortant for the business & information systems engineering (bise) 
readership. the boundaries of what is done by people and what is done by software will continue to shift. machine intelligence will not just change the operational processes in an organizatio n, but also 
the way the organization is managed and transformed.  here concepts such as hybrid intelligence (hi) 
and the digital twin of an organization (dto) will play a role. yet, there are many open challenges for 
bise researchers. creating dtos can be seen as one of the grand challenges  in the field of information 
systems. moreover, the covid -19 pandemic and rapid climate changes illustrate the importance of 
resilience.  it is not enough to create  systems that are redundant and act autonomously . human 
intelligence continues to play a vital role in ensuring resilience . 
references  
caporuscio m, edrisi f, hallberg m, johannesson a, kopf c, perez -palacin d (2020) architectural 
concerns for digital twin of the organization. in: jansen a, malavolta i, muccini h, ozkaya i, 
zimmermann o (eds) european conference on software architecture (ecsa 2020), springer-
verlag, berlin, lecture notes in computer science, vol 12292, pp 265 –280  
dellermann d, ebel p, söllner m, leimeister j (2019) hybrid intelligence. business and information 
systems engineering 61(5):637– 643  
frey c, osborne m (2017) the future of employment: how susceptible are jobs to computerisation? 
technological forecasting and social change 114(c):254 – 280  
fuller a, fan z, day c, barlow c (2020) digital twin: enabling technologies, challenges and open 
research. ieee access 8:108952 –108971  
hawksworth j, berriman r, goel s (2018) will robots really steal our jobs? an international analysis 
of the potential long term impact of automation. tech. rep., pricew aterhousecoopers  
kerremans m, kopcho j (2019) create a digital twin of your organization to optimize your digital 
transformation program, research note g00379226, www.gartner.com  
kritzinger w, karner m, traar g, henjes j, sihn w (2018) digital twin in manufacturing: a categorical 
literature review and class ification. 16th ifac symposium on information control problems 
in manufacturing (incom 2018), ifac -papersonline 51(11):1016 –1022 
lecun y, bengio y, hinton g (2015) deep learning. nature 521:436 –444  
liebenberg m, jarke m (2020) information systems engineering with digital shadows: concept and 
case studies. in: dustdar s, yu e, salinesi c, rieu d, pant v (eds) international conference on advanced information systems engineering (caise 2020), springer -verlag, berlin, lecture 
notes in computer science, vol 12127, pp 70 –84 
losier lm, fernandes r, tabarro p, braunschweig f (2019) the importance of digital twins for 
resilient infrastructure.  bentley systems incorporated white paper. www.bentley.com  
van der aalst wmp (2016) process mining: data science in action. springer- verlag, berlin  
van der aalst wmp (2021a) concurrency and objects matter! disentangling the fabric of real 
operational processes to create digital twins. in: cerone a, olveczky p (eds) internat ional 
colloquium on theoretical aspects of computing (ictac 2021), springer- verlag, berlin, 
lecture notes in computer science, vol 12819  
van der aalst w (2021b) hybrid intelligence: to automate or not to automate, that is the question. 
international journ al of information systems and project management 9(2):5 –20  
van der aalst w, brockhof. t, farhang a, pourbafrani m, uysal ms,  van zelst sj (2021) removing 
operational friction using process mining: challenges provided by the internet of production 
(iop). in: hammoudi s, quix c (eds) data management technologies and applications (data 
2020), springer -verlag, berlin, communications in computer and information science, vol 
1446, pp 1– 31  
 
 
 