opportunities and challenges for process mining in
organisations – results of a delphi study
niels martin dominik a. fischer georgi d. kerpedzhiev kanika goel
sander j.j. leemans maximilian röglinger wil m.p. van der aalst
marlon dumas marcello la rosa moe t. wynn
process mining is an active research domain and has been applied to understand and
improve business processes. while signiﬁcant research has been conducted on the de-
velopment and improvement of algorithms, evidence on the application of process min-
ing in organisations has been far more limited. in particular, there is limited under-
standing of the opportunities and challenges of using process mining in organisations.
such an understanding has the potential to guide research by highlighting barriers for
process mining adoption and, thus, can contribute to successful process mining initia-
tives in practice. in this respect, this paper provides a holistic view of opportunities
and challenges for process mining in organisations identiﬁed in a delphi study with 40
international experts from academia and industry. besides proposing a set of 30 oppor-
tunities and 32 challenges, the paper conveys insights into the comparative relevance
of individual items, as well as differences in the perceived relevance between academics
and practitioners. therefore, the study contributes to the future development of pro-
cess mining, both as a research ﬁeld and regarding its application in organisations.
keywords - process mining, opportunities, challenges, barriers, delphi study, process
mining adoption, process mining use, business process management
1 introduction
process mining (pm), a specialised form of data-driven process analytics, enables the extraction of de-
tailed insights regarding process behaviour, process performance, conformance of processes to existing
process models, and process improvement opportunities from event logs (van der aalst, 2016). due to
their data-driven character, pm insights support evidence-based process improvement (partington et al.,
12015) and strategic decision-making (mans et al., 2013), which are important enablers of digital transfor-
mation (kerremans et al., 2020). the signiﬁcance of pm is illustrated by its widespread adoption across
a wide range of industries and the rise of pm vendors such as apromore, celonis and fluxicon (reinke-
meyer, 2020).
over the last decade, substantial research in the area of pm has been conducted (thiede et al., 2018).
signiﬁcant efforts on the technical side have resulted in maturing pm algorithms. recently, research
attention has been devoted to topics such as predictive process monitoring (e.g., kratsch et al. 2020;
teinemaa et al. 2019), data quality (e.g., fischer et al. 2020), and algorithms for speciﬁc domains such
as healthcare (e.g., chiudinelli et al. 2020). while prior research has mainly focused on the development
and improvement of pm algorithms, case studies reporting on the application of pm have also been pub-
lished (e.g., andrews et al. 2020). these case studies typically provide rich insights into the use of one
or more pm techniques in speciﬁc organisational contexts and draw lessons regarding points of attention
for the use of pm in the organisation (e.g., reinkemeyer 2020). though being highly valuable, such
insights are often limited to the boundaries of a single organisation. a more generic and holistic under-
standing of the opportunities and challenges of using pm in organisational settings would complement
existing insights based on case studies. such an understanding is needed to guide research by revealing
barriers for pm adoption and highlighting avenues that the pm research community should explore to
contribute to successful pm initiatives. in industry, it could help to shape the roadmap for pm initiatives
leveraging relevant opportunities, while being fully conscious about the prevailing challenges. against
this background, this paper investigates the following research question: what are the opportunities and
challenges of using pm in organisations?
to approach the research question, we perform a delphi study with pm experts from both academia
and industry. delphi studies are an explorative qualitative research method, consisting of multiple rounds
in which experts provide and collaboratively reﬂect on insights into a given topic (kerpedzhiev et al.,
2021). our delphi study resulted in a list of 30 opportunities and 32 challenges relevant for the suc-
cessful use of pm in organisations. the opportunities and challenges are structured along the bpm core
elements (i.e., strategic alignment, governance, methods/information technology (it), people, andcul-
ture; de bruin and rosemann 2007) and, for the opportunities regarding methods/it , along the phases
of the bpm lifecycle (i.e., process discovery, process analysis, process redesign and implementation,
andprocess monitoring and controlling ; dumas et al. 2018). in addition to the list of opportunities and
2challenges, we also provide insights into their comparative relevance as judged by the expert panel, as
well as the differences in the perceived relevance between academics and practitioners. hence, this study
imparts an understanding of the areas in which pm can contribute and indicates points of attention when
adopting pm. furthermore, it highlights important avenues for future research in the area of pm.
the rest of the paper is structured as follows: section 2 provides background and related work.
section 3 outlines the study design and research method. section 4 presents the main ﬁndings of our
study. section 5 presents a discussion, including relevant contributions and limitations of the study. the
paper ends with a conclusion and outlook into future research in section 6.
2 background & related work
2.1 business process management
bpm is “a body of methods, techniques and tools to identify, discover, analyse, redesign, execute and
monitor business processes in order to optimise their performance" (dumas et al., 2018, p. 6). a business
process represents “a collection of interrelated events, activities and decision points that involve a number
of actors and objects, which collectively lead to an outcome that brings value to at least one customer"
(dumas et al., 2018, p. 6). from a process lifecycle perspective, bpm includes the activities of process
identiﬁcation ,discovery ,analysis ,redesign ,implementation , and monitoring and controlling (dumas
et al., 2018; rosemann and vom brocke, 2015c). apart from the lifecycle perspective, bpm has been
increasingly conceptualised as a corporate capability that can be decomposed into distinct capability
areas, typically grouped into respective capability frameworks (kerpedzhiev et al., 2021; van looy et al.,
2014). accordingly, many bpm capability frameworks and maturity models have been proposed over
the years (van looy et al., 2017). one comprehensive and widely-adopted framework is that of de bruin
and rosemann (2007), which consists of thirty capability areas grouped along the six core elements of
bpm: strategic alignment, governance, methods, it, people , and culture . since we deemed the core
elements accurately reﬂected experts’ input, we used them to structure the challenges and opportunities
from the second round onwards. section 3 provides details on this decision.
2.2 process mining
2.2.1 development of the field
pm, a ﬁeld situated at the intersection between data science and process science, aims to extract knowl-
edge from event logs to discover, monitor, and improve business processes (van der aalst, 2016). hence,
3it supports various bpm lifecycle phases using data about the execution of a process (van der aalst, 2016;
van der aalst et al., 2012). relevant research efforts tend to focus on the development and improvement
of pm algorithms for various use cases. initially, pm research centred on control-ﬂow discovery, i.e. re-
trieving a process ﬂow model from an event log. while control-ﬂow discovery has remained an important
use case (augusto et al., 2018), pm research has broadened its scope over time to include techniques for
checking conformance between a control-ﬂow model and an event log (carmona et al., 2018), gaining
insights in the involvement of resources in a process (song and van der aalst, 2008), or connecting pm
to other techniques such as simulation and predictive process monitoring (kratsch et al., 2020; martin
et al., 2016; teinemaa et al., 2019). while many of the state-of-the-art pm algorithms have been inte-
grated into the open-source platform prom, the use of pm in organisations has been stimulated by the
development of commercial tools such as apromore, celonis, and disco (van der aalst, 2016).
2.2.2 use of process mining in organisations
in the related work regarding the use of pm in organisations, a distinction can be made between business
reports and academic literature. business reports typically list common use cases and vendors based on
their assessment of the market. hspi, for instance, compiled 551 case descriptions (hspi, 2020). in
another business report, koplowitz (2020) argues that pm enhances transparency in the organisation and
includes an overview of commercial vendors. an overview of vendors, is also part of gartner’s annual
market guide for pm, together with an outline of, e.g., the main drivers of pm adoption and common
use cases (kerremans et al., 2020). recently, deloitte surveyed early and mature pm adopters to gain
insights in, amongst others, pm expectations, critical success factors, application areas, and the next
steps in terms of pm deployment within the organisations (galic and wolf, 2021).
in the academic literature , two main research streams regarding the use of pm in organisations can
be distinguished: (i) ﬁner granularity: targeted pm case studies and (ii) coarser granularity: dedicated
research on the general use of pm in organisations. other works, focusing on pm tool comparison and
selection (e.g., agostinelli et al. 2019; drakoulogkonas and apostolou 2021; turner et al. 2012), are
relevant to support the uptake of pm, but are dedicated to the technical aspects of certain techniques or
tools. as a consequence, they will not be elaborated upon.
finer granularity: targeted pm case studies
case studies focus on the application of existing pm techniques in a speciﬁc organisational context.
4due to the profound analysis of the speciﬁc organisational setting, case studies can deliver rich insights
regarding the opportunities and challenges of pm within this context. for instance, from an analysis of
the patient transportation process after trafﬁc accidents in queensland, andrews et al. (2020) conclude
that the composition of the event log was very challenging and that pm algorithms could not always
handle the process complexity. moreover, domain expertise is deemed indispensable, both to obtain
readable outcomes and to identify improvement options (andrews et al., 2020). similar to andrews
et al. (2020), mahendrawathi et al. (2015) also observe that the composition of an event log was far from
trivial. by studying the customer fulﬁlment process at a telecommunication company, they especially
highlight the challenge of integrating data which is dispersed over different systems (mahendrawathi
et al., 2015). in his recent compendium, reinkemeyer (2020) compiles twelve pm cases from various
application areas such as manufacturing and ﬁnance. besides the impact of pm, the cases also report on
lessons learned. an example of such a lesson is that pm should be leveraged to improve processes for
the future, not to blame staff members for suboptimal processes in the past (reinkemeyer, 2020).
while the aforementioned works report on original case studies, other contributions review published
case studies. these reviews either cover several sectors (emamjome et al., 2019; thiede et al., 2018) or
focus on a particular sector such as healthcare (rojas et al., 2016) or education (ghazal et al., 2017).
thiede et al. (2018) review 144 empirical studies and conclude that pm mainly focuses on a single
system in a single organisation, showing the need for efforts on cross-system and cross-organisational
pm (thiede et al., 2018). following a similar research approach, emamjome et al. (2019) survey 152
case studies and study their thoroughness over time. they observe that the thoroughness with which the
problem context is considered during a pm project is not increasing. from this, emamjome et al. (2019)
conclude that pm is currently unable to deliver on its promises in a real-life context and they stress the
need for more methodological guidance.
case studies provide rich and detailed insights into the complexity of using pm in real-life contexts,
but typically focus on a speciﬁc use case in a particular organisation. in turn, conclusions of reviews
of published case studies need to be reﬂected against their foundation on secondary data. our study
complements this line of research as it serves a different purpose, i.e., providing a generic and holistic
understanding of the opportunities and challenges of using pm in organisations. to this end, primary data
is collected from pm experts with extensive experience on the use of pm in organisations. moreover,
our study abstracts from particular pm use cases or organisational contexts, yielding a broad overview.
5coarser granularity: dedicated research on the general use of pm in organisations
another stream of research, which is the closest to our work, studies the use of pm in organisations
without starting from a particular use case. to this end, data is gathered to understand the organisational
mechanisms behind the use of pm using methods such as questionnaires, interviews, or a focus group.
early 2012, claes and poels (2013) surveyed 90 respondents (academics, practitioners and students)
about the use of pm. at the time, the most frequently mentioned beneﬁts of pm were its objective
nature, as well as the speed to generate results once the data is ready for analysis. commonly mentioned
limitations of pm were limited data access, high costs of data preparation, issues with data quality, lack
of intuitiveness and guidance, and difﬁculties to understand pm output (claes and poels, 2013). in the
same time period, mans et al. (2013) identiﬁed six success factors for pm projects based on a literature
review and eight interviews spread over four organisations. the resulting success factors were sufﬁcient
management support, adequate project management, presence of domain expertise, presence of technical
pm skills, the level of structure in the pm approach, and the quality of raw data (mans et al., 2013).
recently, two targeted studies on the adoption and use of pm in organisations have been published.
syed et al. (2020) explore the adoption of pm in a dutch pension fund which recently started to use a
commercial pm tool. based on nine stakeholder interviews, seven challenges and four enablers of pm
adoption were identiﬁed. the challenges include the absence of governance mechanisms, a disconnect
between the design team and end-users, and the presence of data quality issues. conversely, pm adoption
is enabled by the ability to generate actionable insights, the presence of conﬁdence in the outcomes, the
perceived beneﬁts of pm, and the availability of adequate pm training (syed et al., 2020).
while syed et al. (2020) focus on a single organisation in the early stage of pm adoption, grisold
et al. (2020) take a broader perspective by reporting on a focus group with 22 process managers. their
key ﬁndings include that (i) creating business value with pm is possible, but hard to quantify, (ii) selecting
the appropriate processes to use pm is challenging, (iii) gathering the required data is far from trivial, (iv)
using pm requires coping with increased transparency, and (v) aligning pm initiatives with the strategy
and operations is required. despite the relevance of their work, the authors recognise the rather limited
geographical spread of the experts (switzerland, germany and liechtenstein) and the limited focus group
duration as limitations of their design. hence, they stress the need for additional studies which explore
the organisational use of pm (grisold et al., 2020).
the aforementioned works provide valuable pointers on the use of pm in organisations based on a
6single consultation of experts afﬁliated to one or several organisations. in our study, we aim to extend
this stream of research by providing a structured and holistic overview of opportunities and challenges
regarding the use of pm in organisations. to the best of our knowledge, such an overview is absent in
literature. to achieve this goal, we conduct a delphi study with an international panel of academics and
practitioners, in which experts are involved in multiple study rounds, interspersed with feedback (okoli
and pawlowski, 2004).
3 study design and research method
3.1 delphi study as a research method
to approach the research question regarding opportunities and challenges for the use of pm in organisa-
tions, we decided to conduct a delphi study. delphi studies are a well-established method in is and bpm
research that strives for consensus on a speciﬁc topic with a panel of experts over multiple rounds utilis-
ing questionnaires interspersed with feedback (gupta and clarke, 1996; skinner et al., 2015). prominent
examples of the use of the method in the is and bpm literature include the identiﬁcation of bpm capa-
bilities in the digital age (kerpedzhiev et al., 2021), the identiﬁcation and rating of reasons for process
deviance (könig et al., 2019), the establishment of criteria for selecting cloud service providers (lang
et al., 2018), the identiﬁcation of grand challenges for is (becker et al., 2015), the examination of the
constituent values of a bpm-supportive cultural setting (schmiedel et al., 2013), and the identiﬁcation
of perceived beneﬁts of process modelling (indulska et al., 2009).
the delphi method poses that experts remain anonymous throughout the study to avoid any bias
resulting from confrontation or defending preconceived notions (okoli and pawlowski, 2004; skinner
et al., 2015). in each round, the experts’ opinions and feedback are anonymised, consolidated by the
research team, and shared with the panel to be reviewed until predeﬁned termination criteria are met (paré
et al., 2013). different delphi study setups such as a classical, policy, decision, and ranking-type delphi
have been proposed over the years. the corresponding rounds can focus on brainstorming, validation,
narrowing-down, or ranking (paré et al., 2013). to ensure the sound use of the delphi method, multiple
rigour criteria and good practices have been proposed, which we observed when conducting our delphi
study (keeney et al., 2006; okoli and pawlowski, 2004; paré et al., 2013; schmidt, 1997). these criteria
include, amongst others, reporting essential background information on the experts’ demographics and
background, ensuring anonymity throughout the study, and providing clear instructions in all phases of
7the study.
3.2 study design decisions
in line with our goal of identifying and ranking opportunities and challenges for the use of pm in organi-
sations, this section outlines important design decisions in terms of setting up and conducting the delphi
study. we communicated these design decisions to the experts before and during the study and allowed
the experts to comment on them.
firstly, in accordance with the goal of our research – the holistic identiﬁcation of opportunities and
challenges for the use of pm in organisations, as well as getting insights into their comparative relevance
– we followed the blueprint of ranking-type delphi studies as proposed by schmidt (1997). ranking-
type delphi studies are the most commonly used delphi blueprint in is research (paré et al., 2013)
and include a brainstorming, narrowing-down, and ranking phase. in our study, we opted for rating
(i.e., the assignment of opportunities and challenges to predeﬁned ordinally-scaled relevance categories)
instead of ranking (i.e., the assignment of opportunities and challenges to ordered ranks in line with their
relevance) the opportunities and challenges for pm in organisations (könig et al., 2019). since ranking
is only feasible for a small number of items, it would have required an artiﬁcial restriction of the number
of opportunities and challenges to reduce the cognitive load on the experts. as this is not consistent with
the holistic scope of our study, we opted for rating instead of ranking.
secondly, we aimed for a comprehensive identiﬁcation of opportunities and challenges for the use
of pm in organisations, while ensuring unrestricted expert input. therefore, we did not formally require
that opportunities and challenges are exclusive to pm, provided that they have a pm-speciﬁc relevance
or a speciﬁc interpretation in the context of pm. to ensure a common understanding of an opportunity
and a challenge , we provided the experts with pm-centric deﬁnitions of both concepts.
deﬁnition 1 (opportunity). anopportunity is a favourable circumstance or an expected beneﬁt for an
individual, a team, or an organisation enabled by the use of pm in organisations.
deﬁnition 2 (challenge). achallenge is a difﬁculty or an obstacle that arises when using (or intending
to use) pm in organisations, and that requires a lot of energy and determination from an individual, a
team, or an organization to overcome.
further, from the onset of the study, we encouraged experts to consider a wide range of perspectives
on pm by brieﬂy referring to the well-established and comprehensive six core elements of bpm (i.e.,
8strategic alignment, governance, methods, it, people, andculture ; de bruin and rosemann 2007). how-
ever, we purposefully refrained from using the six core elements as a structure for the expert input in the
ﬁrst round of the study and employed a greenﬁeld approach to avoid constraining the experts into prede-
ﬁned categories. based on the input we received in the ﬁrst round, we reviewed several well-established
frameworks from literature as a potential lens to structure opportunities and challenges. we chose the
core elements as structuring elements as they fulﬁlled the goal of providing a holistic lens for the experts’
input. furthermore, the core elements deﬁne the structure of a comprehensive and widely-adopted bpm
capability framework -– the one of de bruin and rosemann (2007). the core elements and the corre-
sponding bpm capability framework are ﬁrmly anchored in the bpm literature: they have been used
to structure the handbook on bpm (rosemann and vom brocke, 2015a,1), as well as real-world bpm
success stories (vom brocke and mendling, 2018). further, kerpedzhiev et al. (2021) have recently used
the core elements to identify bpm capability areas in view of digitalisation. in our study, we merged the
core elements methods anditbecause there are rarely methods without it support in the pm ﬁeld and
vice versa (kerpedzhiev et al., 2021).
where appropriate, we further assigned speciﬁc opportunities within the core element methods/it
to the bpm lifecycle phases ( process discovery, process analysis, process redesign, process implemen-
tation, andprocess monitoring and controlling ; dumas et al. 2018) to reﬂect the subtle nuances in the
experts’ input. thereby, we merged process redesign andprocess implementation as the expert input in
the ﬁrst round that related to these phases was closely intertwined. to ensure a common understanding
of the relevant input categories, we provided the experts with pm-centric deﬁnitions of the used bpm
core elements and lifecycle phases (table 1).
thirdly, we invited experts from both academia and industry to participate in the study to account
for the diversity of the pm ﬁeld (okoli and pawlowski, 2004; paré et al., 2013). thus, we aimed to
recruit experts from different countries, backgrounds, and pm subcommunities (schmiedel et al., 2013).
regarding the selection of academic and industry experts, we posed formal requirements that participants
in the study had to fulﬁl (okoli and pawlowski, 2004). thus, we required academic experts to have a
ph.d. degree in a ﬁeld related to pm as well as at least ﬁve years of relevant academic experience.
additionally, they had to have been involved in at least two real-life applications of pm over the ﬁve
years prior to the study. practitioners had to have at least three years of work experience and at least
one year of experience regarding the use of pm. inviting both academics and practitioners also allowed
9table 1: pm-centric deﬁnitions of the bpm core elements and lifecycle phases
bpm core element/
lifecycle phasepm-centric deﬁnition
strategic alignment pm needs to be aligned with the overall strategy of an organisation and therefore has to be
designed, executed, managed, and measured according to strategic priorities and objectives.
governance pm governance establishes appropriate and transparent accountability in terms of roles and
responsibilities as well as regulations regarding data collection and handling.
methods/it methods in the context of pm are deﬁned as the set of tools and techniques as well as it-based
solutions that support and enable actions along the bpm lifecycle and within pm initiatives.
process discovery the current state of a business process is discovered, typically in the form of as-is business
process models.
process analysis issues associated with the as-is business process are identiﬁed, documented, and, whenever
possible, quantiﬁed using performance measures.
process redesign
and implementationthe transition from the as-is business process to the to-be business process is prepared and
performed to address the issues identiﬁed during business process analysis.
process monitoring
and controllingrelevant data are collected and analysed to determine how well the running business process
is performing concerning performance measures and objectives.
people people are the individuals and groups who continually enhance and apply their pm skills and
knowledge to improve business performance.
culture culture incorporates the collective values and beliefs, aiming at creating a facilitating envi-
ronment that complements pm initiatives.
us to get valuable insights into differences between both groups regarding the comparative relevance of
opportunities and challenges. therefore, we intended to split the panel into an academic and industry
subpanel in the rating phase of the study.
finally, we judged the quality and convergence of the study’s results both quantitatively and qual-
itatively. from a quantitative perspective, we followed the well-established practice of measuring the
experts’ satisfaction with the coding of opportunities and challenges (coding satisfaction) as well as their
overall satisfaction with the study (kerpedzhiev et al., 2021; schmiedel et al., 2013). we employed a
7-point likert scale: 1 (extremely dissatisﬁed), 2 (moderately dissatisﬁed), 3 (slightly dissatisﬁed), 4
(neither satisﬁed nor dissatisﬁed), 5 (slightly satisﬁed), 6 (moderately satisﬁed), and 7 (extremely satis-
ﬁed). using such measures ensured an objective indication of the convergence of the study in addition
to the qualitative feedback of the experts in each round. it also allowed us to check for selection bias
ensuring that satisfaction ratings had not risen because dissatisﬁed experts dropped out, but because the
experts had become more satisﬁed with the results (heckman, 2010). overall, we aimed for a positive
trend in the quantitative measures, as well as a high level of satisfaction (mean above 6 and standard
deviation below 1), accompanied with positive qualitative expert feedback (paré et al., 2013).
103.3 preparatory activities
to ensure the most suitable expert panel composition, we invited experts in line with the selection criteria
mentioned in section 3.2 (okoli and pawlowski, 2004). given the required commitment and the level
of experience necessary to successfully participate in the study, we primarily recruited experts from our
academic and professional networks. we ﬁrst identiﬁed a longlist of 87 candidates for the expert panel,
32 academics and 55 practitioners. of the latter, 30 candidates had a pm function in their respective
organisations, 14 were pm consultants, and 11 represented pm tool vendors. after reviewing the longlist
of the 87 initially identiﬁed candidates, we determined that 57 fulﬁlled the established formal selection
criteria (21 academic and 36 industry experts). we invited those 57 experts and allowed them to nominate
further candidates they deemed suitable for the purposes of the study. 41 experts agreed to participate in
the study, amounting to a high initial response rate of 72% (one expert did not participate in round 1).
the panel was well-balanced in terms of technically- and business-oriented experts, as well as in
terms of academics and practitioners. it also covered experts from 16 countries. the 17 academic ex-
perts held their ph.d. for an average of 12.2 years and had 10.4 years of experience in pm research on
average, while practitioners had an average of 20 years of work experience with an average of 6.4 years of
experience with pm. based on the open questions in the ﬁrst round of the study, we determined that aca-
demic experts had experience in using pm in diverse ﬁelds such as healthcare, logistics, manufacturing,
and ﬁnancial services. more background information on the panel can be found in appendix a.
to test the study setup speciﬁcally for the initial brainstorming in the ﬁrst delphi round, we con-
ducted a pilot study in line with the established quality criteria for delphi studies (kerpedzhiev et al.,
2021; skinner et al., 2015). the aim of the pilot study was to ensure the understandability of the ques-
tionnaire for the ﬁrst brainstorming round, identify confusing and/or ambiguous wording, and ensure an
appropriate level of detail is achieved (skinner et al., 2015). the questionnaire included a description of
the goal of the research, a comprehensive deﬁnition of pm as well as the speciﬁc assignment along with
the aforementioned deﬁnitions for an opportunity and a challenge . we distributed the questionnaire to
eleven ph.d. students in the ﬁeld of bpm and asked them to ﬁll it out. after the students had provided
their input, we invited them to a joint live session to discuss any issues that compromised the understand-
ability of the questionnaire. we received overwhelmingly positive feedback coupled with high-quality
responses with direct relevance to the topic. based on the feedback, we performed only slight changes
to the wording of the questionnaire to further enhance its understandability.
11before starting the study, we also agreed on common guidelines when coding experts’ responses
in the brainstorming and validation rounds. in each round, one designated co-author anonymised the
experts’ responses so that the rest of the author team could code the input independently. we used ax-
ial and selective coding (moghaddam, 2006). thus, each co-author involved in coding ﬁrst aimed to
summarise similar items in the experts’ input and merged the relevant explanations before proceeding
to establish relationships among them by categorizing the data (schmidt, 1997). we iteratively consol-
idated the results of each involved co-author in joint workshops (okoli and pawlowski, 2004). after
each workshop, all coded responses were traced to the input of at least one expert to ensure that they
accurately reﬂected the experts’ ideas and not ours. we also established and agreed on guidelines on the
formulation of opportunities and challenges (schmidt et al., 2001). in that respect, we strived for short
denominations with positive polarity and single-sentence descriptions without domain-speciﬁc and/or
technology-centred vocabulary.
3.4 delphi study procedure and key figures
the delphi study comprised six rounds and took two and a half months to complete. in each round, the
experts had one week to ﬁll in an online questionnaire1. they always received the option to provide open-
ended comments on the ongoing round and the study in general. additionally, as per relevant quality
criteria for delphi studies, the questionnaire for each round included detailed instructions, deﬁnitions,
responses from the previous round, and an overview of the changes compared to the previous round
(keeney et al., 2006; paré et al., 2013; skinner et al., 2015). table 2 provides an overview of the key
ﬁgures regarding the delphi study such as the number of participants and the satisfaction scores per
round. in the remainder of this subsection, we provide a short overview of the delphi procedure and
elaborate on some key insights regarding the experts’ participation in and satisfaction with the study.
to avoid introducing redundancy between sections 3 and 4, we already present key ﬁgures from the
operationalisation of the delphi study procedure in the following. a detailed account of each round can
be found in appendix b. in section 4, we will focus on the core results in terms of the ﬁnal opportunities
and challenges, including the respective ratings after the last round of the study.
in the brainstorming phase, we collected initial lists of opportunities and challenges for the use of
pm (round 1). we received 215 opportunities and 211 challenges, which we consolidated into 28
1the used questionnaires, which include all intermediate results, and anonymised responses are provided as electronic
supplementary material (available online via http://link.springer.com ).
12table 2: overview of the delphi study procedure and statistics
phase brainstorming narrowing down rating
round 1 2 3 4 5 6
active panellists 40 37 35 32 32 32
academics 17 16 16 16 16 16
practitioners 23 21 19 16 16 16
number of opportunitiesa28 36 30 30 30 30
number of challengesa27 33 32 32 32 32
satisfaction study overall (mean)b- 6.16 6.43 6.53 6.47 6.66
satisfaction study overall (sd)b- 1.05 0.93 0.56 0.66 0.47
satisfaction coding (mean)b,c- 6.11 6.34 6.34 - -
satisfaction coding (sd)b,c- 0.95 0.92 0.96 - -
aafter coding or voting
blikert scale from 1 to 7 (not assessed before round 2)
clikert scale from 1 to 7 (only assessed until round 4, reﬂects the satisfaction with the
coding results of the previous rounds)
opportunities and 27 challenges as part of the coding procedure. in round 2, we asked the experts to
validate these and, based on the experts’ input, we decreased the level of aggregation. this resulted in an
increase of the number of opportunities and challenges to 36 and 33, respectively. these served as the
input in the narrowing down phase (round 3), in which the panellists had to vote out the least relevant
opportunities and challenges resulting from round 2. we applied a simple majority rule, according to
which we eliminated items which were voted out by more than 50% of the panel. thus, six opportunities
and one challenge were eliminated, resulting in a ﬁnal list of 30 opportunities and 32 challenges. in the
rating phase (rounds 4-6), the experts rated the shortlisted items regarding their comparative relevance.
in this phase, we split the panel into an academic and practitioner subpanel (as intended) to get insights
into possible differences between the two groups regarding the rating of items. note that experts were
not requested to justify their ratings given the exploratory nature of the study and the efforts which were
already asked from the experts throughout the study.
to investigate differences between the ratings of the subpanels, we ﬁrstly used the median of the
rating distributions, secondly the mode, and lastly the fisher’s exact test (mehta and patel, 1983). the
latter was included to enable us to also test quantitatively, for each opportunity or challenge, the null
hypothesis that there is no association between the rating distributions and the subpanels. hence, the
two rating distributions can be seen as part of a p q contingency table where p represents the number
of subpanels (p = 2) and q the number of rating categories (q = 4). several statistical tests exist to test
13null hypotheses based on a contingency table, speciﬁcally, the chi-squared test or the fisher’s exact test
(bland, 2015). since our sample size is relatively small (n = 32), the more complex but exact fisher’s
exact test is appropriate because it is also valid for small sample sizes (bland, 2015). in addition to the
qualitative comparison of the rating distributions for each item, the statistical test allows us to quantita-
tively assess whether the rating distributions for respective opportunities or challenges are signiﬁcantly
different. finally, both the qualitative and quantitative comparisons of the rating distributions help us
discuss the study outcomes. we elaborate on the results of the tests and the study as a whole in section 4.
between 32 (round 6) and 40 experts (round 1) participated in each round, a ﬁgure complying with
the recommendations in literature (paré et al., 2013). this corresponds to an end-to-end dropout ratio
of 20%, which is in normal bounds considering the prolonged commitment required when participating
in a delphi study comprising six rounds. the dropout ratio also reﬂects our strict policy of not inviting
experts who had not participated in the previous round. the rationale behind this policy is that experts
had to be aware of the communicated decisions, information, and outcomes regarding the previous round.
the only exception to this rule was round 3 (narrowing down), in which we invited all experts who had
participated in round 1, but not in round 2. this exception is justiﬁable as round 2 served as a validation
round and experts who had not participated were, nevertheless, aware of the goals of the study and had
contributed to the collection of opportunities and challenges in round 1. despite the expert dropout, the
panel remained balanced throughout the study, i.e. there was no systematic drain of participants from a
particular group based on country of activity, or their academic or practitioner background.
the overall satisfaction and coding satisfaction were very high from the beginning of the study and
increased steadily, while the respective standard deviation decreased with two minor exceptions: the
overall study satisfaction in round 5 and the coding satisfaction in round 4. we attribute the former to
individual experts being dissatisﬁed with the general rating of challenges and opportunities in round 4.
the latter is most probably driven by the fact that some experts deemed certain challenges and opportuni-
ties that were eliminated in round 3 very valuable. nevertheless, the extremely high satisfaction values,
as well as the positive trend of the overall and coding satisfaction, coupled with the positive qualitative
feedback, lead us to believe that the results have converged after round 6. after completing the study, we
also checked for selection bias (i.e., experts leaving the study due to dissatisfaction causing satisfaction
ratings to inﬂate artiﬁcially). a mean overall study satisfaction of 6.67 with a standard deviation of 0.52
in the round before dropout suggests that experts did not leave due to dissatisfaction (appendix c).
144 results
tables 3 and 4 summarise the main results of the delphi study: the shortlisted opportunities and chal-
lenges, including the rating distributions regarding the comparative relevance of the items in the academic
and industry subpanels. as previously stated, the opportunities and challenges are structured along the
bpm core elements (de bruin and rosemann, 2007), with the opportunities related to the core element
methods/it being further categorised along the bpm lifecycle phases (dumas et al., 2018).
each row in the tables includes the id, the denomination, and a single-sentence description of the
respective opportunity or challenge. also, the ﬁnal rating distributions of both subpanels, academics
(blue vertical lining) and practitioners (red horizontal lining), are shown using bar charts, as well as
percentage values in the third column. in appendix d, tables 9 and 10 also contain the median and mode
rating values for both subpanels, as well as the p-value of the fisher’s exact test statistics, indicating
the signiﬁcance of inhomogeneity among the subpanels for the rating of the respective opportunity or
challenge. asterisks are used in table 3 and 4 to label the denomination of an item in case of signiﬁcant
inhomogeneity of the subpanel rating distributions based on the fisher’s exact test (0 :01p<0:05:
signiﬁcant*; 0 :001p<0:01: very signiﬁcant**; p<0:001: highly signiﬁcant***). when discussing
commonalities and differences regarding the subpanel rating distributions, we use the median as the
primary criterion since it is more robust for outliers than the mode (von der gracht, 2012). in case of
different medians, we use the mode and fisher’s exact test statistics to check for signiﬁcant difference.
to illustrate the interpretation of the results tables, the ﬁrst row of table 3 contains the ﬁnal results
regarding the opportunity enabling inter-organisational value creation (o.1), which is described as “pm
enables value creation by fostering inter-organisational interaction and collaboration". 6.25% of the
academics and 56.25% of the practitioners rated this opportunity as extremely relevant (62.50% of the
academics and 12.50% of the practitioners as moderately relevant, 31.25% of the academics and 25.00%
of the practitioners as slightly relevant, 0% of the academics and 6.25% of the practitioners as irrelevant).
the median and mode of these distributions are moderately relevant for academics and extremely relevant
for practitioners. the p-value resulting from the fisher’s exact test statistics is 0.0026 indicating that
the inhomogeneity of the subpanel rating distributions is very signiﬁcant. hence, the denomination is
labelled with two asterisks (**).
as shown in table 3 and 4, the delphi study resulted in 30 opportunities and 32 challenges considered
15table 3: shortlisted opportunities for the use of pm in organisations
id strategic alignment er mr sr ir
o.1enabling inter-organisational value creation**
pm enables value creation by fostering inter-organisational interaction and collaboration.
o.2facilitating strategic decision-making
pm facilitates strategic decision-making by objectively assessing the congruency of operational practices
and corporate strategy.
o.3supporting digital transformation***
pm supports identifying digital transformation initiatives as well as designing digital transformation
strategies.
governance
o.4maintaining an up-to-date business process repository
pm enables maintaining an up-to-date business process repository.
o.5supporting data management
pm helps identify relevant data and highlights potential data management issues.
methods/it - overall
o.6complementing management approaches and techniques
pm instils process and data awareness into other management approaches and techniques.
o.7supporting it management
pm helps derive insights that are useful for the selection, implementation, and improvement of it sys-
tems, tools, and interfaces.
methods/it - process discovery
o.8accelerating as-is business process modelling*
pm accelerates as-is business process modelling and makes it more objective compared to data-agnostic
methods.
o.9enhancing business process transparency
pm increases the transparency of business processes by visualising the actual business process ﬂows
based on real-life data.
methods/it - process analysis
o.10analysing business processes from the resource perspective
pm permits the retrieval of actionable insights into the resource involvement and collaboration patterns
in a business process.
o.11analysing business process variants and exceptions*
pm allows the analysis of business process variants and exceptional business process instances, support-
ing initiatives such as business process standardisation.
o.12understanding business process compliance
pm allows efﬁcient and comprehensive compliance checking of business process executions as well as
understanding the reasons for deviant behaviour and fraud.
o.13detecting business process drift*
pm enables the detection of business process changes and getting insights into the evolution of business
processes over time.
o.14enabling business process comparison and benchmarking
pm enables comparative analysis and benchmarking of business processes or business process variants.
o.15enhancing business process risk management
pm enables assessing business process risks and supports the deﬁnition of risk mitigation actions.
o.16identifying business process waste
pm supports the identiﬁcation of business process waste such as non-value-added tasks or bottlenecks.
methods/it - process redesign and implementation
o.17enabling business process automation*
pm supports the identiﬁcation of automation potential in business processes.
o.18enhancing business process improvement and redesign
pm enhances business process improvement and redesign, ranging from the identiﬁcation of improve-
ment options to the evaluation of its effects.
o.19improving resource assignment in business processes**
pm allows organisations to improve resource assignments at the levels of tasks and team composition.
methods/it - process monitoring and controlling
o.20enabling decision-making at run-time
pm enables run-time decision-making as well as resource assignment.
o.21evaluating business process performance
pm supports organisations in assessing and continuously monitoring the performance of business pro-
cesses.
o.22predicting outcomes of running cases**
pm supports prediction at run-time regarding expected business process paths and outcomes.
people
o.23enhancing employee training*
pm supports the assessment and improvement of business process training.
o.24enriching domain knowledge through data
pm encourages domain experts to actively analyse business process data.
o.25generating intuitive visualisations for business users
pm generates intuitive business process visualisations for business users without technical expertise.
o.26supporting knowledge management
pm helps make implicit knowledge explicit by unveiling good and bad practices in business processes.
culture
o.27fostering a business process- and data-centric mindset
pm fosters a cross-functional process- and data-centric mindset by visualising business processes and
providing data-backed insights.
o.28fostering a continuous improvement mindset***
pm stimulates a continuous improvement mindset by encouraging employees to systematically scrutinise
business processes.
o.29nurturing evidence-based communication and decision-making
pm acts as a catalyst for evidence-based communication and decision-making, encouraging objective
conversations related to business processes.
o.30supporting a culture of customer centricity
pm supports a culture of customer centricity when retrieving insights in business processes with an
explicit focus on the customer’s perspective.
a: academics(
 ); p: practitioners(
 ); signiﬁcance codes: p <0.001: ***, p <0.01: **, p <0.05: *;
16table 4: shortlisted challenges for the use of pm in organisations
id strategic alignment er mr sr ir
c.1elusive business value
the business value of pm is difﬁcult to determine with regard to the alignment of strategic and opera-
tional goals as well as the quantiﬁcation of costs and beneﬁts.
c.2lack of management support
initiating, funding, and conducting pm initiatives requires a strong management commitment.
c.3unclear success factors
it is unknown which organisational setups and properties ensure an efﬁcient and effective use of pm.
governance
c.4constraining data access barriers
limited data access across departmental and organisational boundaries restricts pm.
c.5lack of interdisciplinary and cross-functional teams*
pm suffers from a lack of interdisciplinary and cross-functional teams covering sponsors, it, and data
specialists as well as business users and project managers.
c.6missing implementation guidance
there is a lack of comprehensive guidance on the implementation of pm for different organisations,
domains, contexts, and strategic goals.
c.7poor data quality*
source or event data are often inaccurate, noisy, and/or incomplete.
c.8restricting data privacy regulations
compliance with data privacy and security regulations limits the detail of what can be discovered and
analysed through pm.
c.9unavailability of data***
the availability of event data needed for pm is limited.
c.10unclear organisational anchoring***
it is unclear how pm expertise should be anchored within the organisation.
methods/it
c.11challenging (real-time) system integration**
insufﬁcient real-time system connectivity or integration into existing it infrastructure negatively impacts
deriving insights through pm.
c.12complex data preparation
substantial effort is required for data extraction and pre-processing.
c.13difﬁcult analysis of process exceptions
pm lacks support for deriving insights from process exceptions.
c.14difﬁcult handling of unstructured data
pm provides limited support for exploiting unstructured data that is not available in activity-based se-
mantics or event format.
c.15fragmented solutions**
there is a lack of comprehensive pm solutions supporting a wide range of conceivable use cases.
c.16incomprehensible outcomes***
non-standard visualisation techniques used in pm may lead to overcomplicated and hardly understand-
able business process models.
c.17insufﬁcient prescriptive capabilities
pm tools are limited regarding their prescriptive capabilities.
c.18lack of advanced features
pm lacks advanced features such as automation, simulation, and data anonymisation.
c.19underrepresentation of declarative models
pm relies disproportionately on imperative business process models and largely disregards declara-
tive/hybrid process models.
people
c.20insufﬁcient domain expertise
the lack of comprehensive domain and business expertise inhibits the ability to customise pm as well
as to adequately interpret the results.
c.21insufﬁcient analytical skills
the lack of fundamental analytical skills, including business process modelling and optimisation, im-
pedes deriving value from pm.
c.22insufﬁcient technical skills**
the lack of sufﬁcient training in technical skills required to implement pm is detrimental to setting up
and conducting pm.
culture
c.23aversion to transparency
pm leads to an undesired level of transparency, revealing unpleasant results and triggering defensive
mechanism in employees.
c.24insufﬁcient data orientation***
a lack of data orientation causes doubts regarding the validity of pm outcomes.
c.25insufﬁcient process orientation***
a lack of process orientation causes doubts regarding the value of pm.
c.26invasive work monitoring
pm is perceived as intrusive and raises concerns about privacy and individual performance controlling.
c.27lack of continuous incorporation
pm is perceived as a one-off initiative, creating a barrier for scaling up and establishing continuous pm.
c.28lack of trust in insights
pm results and their potential to generate value are discredited since applied techniques are not under-
stood or perceived as a black box.
c.29misleading overconﬁdence
overconﬁdence in current business process performance downplays the improvement potential through
pm.
c.30resistance to change
unwillingness to break down long-established routines negatively affects acting on pm insights.
c.31unsubstantiated expectations
more is projected into pm than can realistically be achieved leading to false expectations and disappoint-
ment with the obtained results.
c.32unwillingness to share domain knowledge*
pm stakeholders are unwilling to share domain knowledge due to the fear of providing too much business
information or becoming obsolete.
a: academics(
 ); p: practitioners(
 ); signiﬁcance codes: p <0.001: ***, p <0.01: **, p <0.05: *;
17relevant for the use of pm in organisations. the shortlists contain at least two items per category, a
ﬁnding that emphasises the diversity of our results. the fact that 13 of 30 (43%) opportunities and 23 of
32 (72%) challenges are not related to the core element methods/it is congruent with our initial goal of
also identifying opportunities and challenges beyond the traditional technical focus of pm.
some of the shortlisted items are also applicable beyond the pm context, e.g., lack of management
support as a challenge (c.2). given the holistic nature of the study, we did not enforce that items should
be exclusive for pm. incorporating more generally applicable items also helps to identify which areas of
the management literature can contribute to the successful use of pm. even though exclusivity was not
required, it was stressed that each item should have a speciﬁc relevance or interpretation in the pm con-
text. consequently, all items in table 3 and 4 are considered to be especially relevant for pm according
to the panel. this is illustrated by the descriptions of items provided by experts in round 1. for instance:
lack of management support (c.2) has speciﬁc relevance for pm as it typically involves the commitment
of a wide range of departments as processes cross organisational silos. similarly, experts give a pm-
speciﬁc interpretation for poor data quality (c.7) by indicating that events are not always labelled with a
meaningful human-readable activity label, and that typically a single event is only recorded per activity,
which limits the analysis potential.
in the overview of pm opportunities, a seemingly particular observation is that only one opportu-
nity explicitly refers to the customer, i.e., supporting a culture of customer centricity (o.30). however,
it should be noted that several items highlighted by experts in the ﬁrst round of the study, which have
been aggregated during subsequent coding, explicitly refer to customer-related aspects. for instance:
analysing business process variants and exceptions (o.11) covers expert input which is linked to under-
standing process variation to better serve different customer types, as well as to diagnose exceptional
cases to identify customers requiring a speciﬁc treatment. similarly, the ability of pm to enhance busi-
ness process improvement and redesign (o.18) aggregates customer-related items regarding the improve-
ment of customer experience and satisfaction.
when focusing on the comparative relevance of the opportunities and challenges, table 5 summarises
the median rating distributions of the subpanels. when comparing the academics’ and the practitioners’
median distributions for all opportunities, the distributions indicate overall agreement between both sub-
panels regarding the comparative relevance of the opportunities. this claim is also supported by the fact
that for 13 of 30 opportunities the median as well as mode values are equal and the opportunity-speciﬁc
18table 5: distribution of median values along opportunities and challenges
opportunities challenges
rating academics practitioners academics practitioners
extremely relevant (er) 14 16.5 13.5 4
moderately relevant (mr) 14 13 17.5 22.5
slightly relevant (sr) 2 0.5 1 4.5
irrelevant (ir) - - - -
p-value is not signiﬁcant. in terms of strong alignment between both subpanels, ten key opportunities
are rated as extremely relevant by academics and practitioners according to the median and mode (ta-
ble 6). in contrast, when considering challenges, the subpanels exhibit signiﬁcant differences reﬂected
in their rating distributions. this claim is conﬁrmed by the observation that for only 9 of 32 challenges
the median and mode values are equal and the p-value does not point to a signiﬁcant difference. this
means that academics and practitioners assess the relevance of many challenges differently. only three
key challenges are rated as extremely relevant by both subpanels according to the median and mode
(table 6).
while this section provides a descriptive overview of table 3 and 4, we take a broader interpretative
perspective in section 5 to highlight some valuable insights and implications of the results for both
academia and industry.
table 6: opportunities and challenges rated as extremely relevant by both subpanels
opportunities enhancing business process transparency (o.9)
analysing business processes from the resource perspective (o.10)
analysing business process variants and exceptions (o.11)
understanding business process compliance (o.12)
enabling business process comparison and benchmarking (o.14)
identifying business process waste (o.16)
enhancing business process improvement and redesign (o.18)
evaluating business process performance (o.21)
generating intuitive visualisations for business users (o.25)
nurturing evidence-based communication and decision-making (o.29)
challenges lack of management support (c.2)
poor data quality (c.7)
complex data preparation (c.12)
195 discussion
this section discusses the obtained results. besides the contributions and a general discussion (sec-
tion 5.1), key implications for academics and practitioners are presented (section 5.2), as well as the
limitations of the study (section 5.3).
5.1 contributions and general discussion
as highlighted in the introduction and the outline of related work, pm has matured as a research ﬁeld
over the past decade primarily from a technical standpoint, providing various algorithms to understand
and improve business processes using event logs. in contrast, there is limited systematic understanding
of pm from an organisational perspective. in this respect, a holistic understanding of the opportunities
and challenges regarding the use of pm in organisations is absent, but strongly needed. against this
background, we provide such an overview via a delphi study with recognised academic and industry
experts from various countries and backgrounds. thereby, our study extends the state-of-the-art by means
of its holistic nature, the extensive input collected by applying the delphi method, and the presence of
insights into the comparative relevance of challenges and opportunities. in this way, it surpasses the
scope of existing related research efforts.
theprimary contribution of the delphi study is a list of 30 opportunities and 32 challenges consid-
ered relevant by academics and practitioners regarding the use of pm in organisations. both opportuni-
ties and challenges are very diverse, covering each of the bpm core elements and addressing technical,
managerial, and cultural aspects. for the opportunities, an additional distinction is made between the
phases of the bpm lifecycle and items are present in each stage. despite the historically strong focus
of pm research on the technical side, this study shows that a signiﬁcant number of opportunities and
challenges have a non-technical character. only 17 of 30 opportunities (57%) and 9 of 32 challenges
(28%) are related to the methods/it core element. the fact that relatively more opportunities than chal-
lenges are related to the core element methods/it complies with the observation that pm is still mainly
perceived as a technical practice, but also indicates that pm techniques are maturing. the fact that many
challenges are situated in core elements other than methods/it opens perspectives for diverse strands of
non-technical pm research.
when connecting the listed opportunities and challenges to the related work (section 2.2), our study
conﬁrms and signiﬁcantly extends the state-of-the-art. while it is not trivial to map items from different
20studies due to their variety regarding the level of granularity, such a mapping is included in appendix e.
from this mapping, it can be concluded that all elements that come forward in the recent studies by syed
et al. (2020) and grisold et al. (2020) can be related to opportunities/challenges in our study. for instance:
syed et al. (2020) mention unclarity regarding roles and responsibilities in pm initiatives as a challenge,
which reﬂects an unclear organisational anchoring (c.10). similarly, grisold et al. (2020) highlight the
difﬁculty to quantify the business value of pm, which relates to elusive business value (c.1). conversely,
a multitude of opportunities and challenges in our study were not explicitly mentioned in the state-of-
the-art. regarding opportunities, these include the items in the category governance (o.4 - o.5), as
well as speciﬁc items such as facilitating strategic decision making (o.2), and enabling business process
comparison and benchmarking (o.14). challenges that our study adds include unclear success factors
(c.3), a difﬁcult analysis of process exceptions (c.13), and difﬁcult handling of unstructured data (c.14).
when focusing on challenges, as expected, several challenges mentioned in the recent studies by
grisold et al. (2020) and syed et al. (2020) reoccur in our study. however, a noteworthy observation is
that the most frequently raised limitations by claes and poels (2013), a study dating back to early 2012,
are still relevant today. this relates to limited data access (cf. c.4), high costs of data preparation (cf.
c.12), issues with data quality (cf. c.7), lack of intuitiveness and guidance (cf. c.6), and difﬁculties
to understand pm output (cf. c.16). these challenges all relate to either the input side of pm, the
understandability of pm outcomes, or the available guidance to implement pm in practice. as these
challenges seem to be persistent for the use of pm in real-world settings, the pm community should
investigate avenues to support end-users to alleviate them.
thesecondary contribution of the study are insights into the comparative relevance of opportunities
and challenges, whereby the views of academics and practitioners are purposefully treated separately.
this perspective has not yet been considered in prior literature. as presented in section 4, we observe
stronger consensus between academics and practitioners regarding the comparative relevance of oppor-
tunities than regarding challenges. in terms of opportunities, the rating phase shows that some items
are considered particularly relevant by both academics and practitioners. these tend to be located in
methods/it , suggesting that there seems to be agreement between both subpanels regarding the potential
of pm from a technical perspective. however, practitioners attribute greater relevance to the opportuni-
ties related to strategic alignment than academics, reﬂecting practitioners’ experience in setting up and
advancing pm initiatives.
21in terms of challenges, academics and practitioners agree on the high relevance of data quality (c.7)
and preparation (c.12) as well as management support (c.2). the rest of the challenges exhibit varying
levels of difference between the two subpanels in terms of their relevance. overall, there is a tendency
for academics to rate challenges as more relevant than practitioners (cf. table 5). while this could have
been expected for methods/it , given the profound knowledge of potential technical improvements among
academics, it also holds for organisational challenges such as the ones related to people andculture . dif-
ferences are most obvious for insufﬁcient technical skills (c.22) ,insufﬁcient data orientation (c.24) , and
insufﬁcient process orientation (c.25) . this demonstrates the view of academics that techniques have
come a long way, but people- and culture-related aspects present very prominent challenges. academics
feel more strongly that a pm mindset still needs to be instilled within organisations, accompanied by a
broader dispersion of thorough technical training. one could argue that practitioners might have devel-
oped coping mechanisms to deal with such challenges. academics might not be aware of some of these
mechanisms when they are involved in speciﬁc projects and do not always see the full organisational pic-
ture. while all academics have active experience with the real-life use of pm (cf. section 3.2 – 3.3), we
cannot guarantee that they were exposed to the full organisational complexity of their industry partners.
this might have inﬂuenced their ratings. however, it is also likely that a pm mindset and expertise have
already been, at least partially, established within the organisations represented by the practitioners in
the panel as they are active pm users. academics might be acquainted with a variety of organisations,
some of which are less mature at this level.
the observed differences outlined above indicate a perceived misalignment between academics and
practitioners. to push the boundaries of what pm is capable of in organisational contexts, a strong part-
nership between academia and industry is needed and a disconnect should be avoided. such a disconnect
would impede organisations to reap the full beneﬁts of academic work due to prevailing challenges which
academics are unaware of, or which are considered less relevant given the predominantly technical re-
search interests of many pm researchers. consequently, engaging in bidirectional knowledge transfer
through roundtables or communities of practice, for instance, could ensure that academia solves scien-
tiﬁcally challenging problems with real-world relevance, enabling the industry to beneﬁt from the latest
scientiﬁc insights.
225.2 implications
5.2.1 implications for academics
the results of the study can serve as the basis for a pm research agenda. the comparative relevance of
opportunities and challenges could further contribute to deriving research topics with high priority.
in terms of thematic focus, the strong presence of non-technical opportunities and challenges shows
that there is ample potential for pm research from an organisational perspective. this includes speciﬁc
research areas such as identifying the organisational characteristics supporting pm (i.e., its generic suc-
cess factors – c.3), investigating how pm can be structurally embedded in organisations (c.1, c.10),
or determining which team composition and skills are required to successfully leverage the potential
beneﬁts of pm (c.5, c.21, c.22, c.24, c.25). within the pm ﬁeld, related topics are largely uncharted
research territory, providing a fertile base for future research. when tackling one of the non-technical
challenges that are not exclusive to pm, for instance resistance to change (c.30), valuable inspiration can
be drawn from the rich body of literature on it adoption (rad et al., 2018). in this respect, researchers
need to carefully assess whether knowledge on it adoption is directly applicable to pm, or whether the
particularities of pm adoption and use require speciﬁc approaches.
simultaneously, our results suggest that technical research should not be neglected as it is a key in-
gredient to permanently push the boundaries of pm. in particular, speciﬁc attention should be attributed
to the persistent challenges which were also identiﬁed almost a decade ago. this involves research
aiming to support data preparation (c.12), to handle data quality issues (c.7), and to improve the un-
derstandability of pm outcomes (c.16). this implies that important research challenges are still present
on the input side of pm, as well as on the understandability of the outputs it generates. besides these
speciﬁc research directions, researchers can reﬂect upon the state-of-the-art in pm research against the
opportunities/challenges to derive new algorithmic needs.
the diversity of the results and the perceived misalignment between academics and practitioners also
indicates that pm research should be on the lookout for emerging topics or shifts in priority in existing
topics. in this respect, we expect the identiﬁed opportunities and challenges to remain relatively stable
in the coming years, primarily due to the stability of our delphi results reﬂected, amongst others, in the
high satisfaction ratings. however, the differences between the two subpanels regarding the comparative
relevance of opportunities and challenges lead us to believe that priorities in pm may shift dynamically,
requiring a suitable reaction in pm research. moreover, the broad scope of topics covered in the results
23of our study could serve as an incentive to broaden the horizons of pm research to other ﬁelds, as well
as to intensify efforts at the interface of bpm and is research.
5.2.2 implications for practitioners
for practitioners, the list of opportunities and challenges can help shape the pm roadmap for their or-
ganisation. initially, it can support setting priorities to maximise the beneﬁts, while being aware of
challenges that can reduce the effectiveness or efﬁciency of using pm. later, the lists can function as
checklists during pm initiatives to determine whether all relevant opportunities are leveraged and chal-
lenges are tackled.
the results of our study also allow highlighting certain speciﬁc recommendations for practitioners.
to be successful and draw support from management, practitioners need to enhance the pm business case
by aligning pm projects with the organisation’s priorities and by making returns explicit (c.1). moreover,
organisations should take actions to alleviate data access barriers (c.4) and enhance data quality (c.7),
which appear to be persistent challenges for the use of pm in organisations. to this end, they can, e.g.,
give explicit consideration to pm in the organisation’s data governance strategy and policies. initiatives
to enhance data registration can go hand in hand with increased pm training (c.22). when employees
are aware of the beneﬁts of pm and the impact of their working habits on the resulting event data, they
are likely to be more receptive for policies aiming at improved data registration. regarding training,
our results suggest that organisations should not only invest in tool-based training, but also promote data
and process awareness to set the stage for successful pm projects (c.24, c.25). this can, for instance,
be operationalised by organising inter-departmental workshops to unravel the dependencies between
departments involved in the same process, as well as to demonstrate how departments can beneﬁt from
pm insights.
5.3 limitations
the results of this study need to be reﬂected against some limitations, which are linked to the nature of
delphi studies and the design decisions that were made. firstly, as with any delphi study, the results are
based on the perception of a limited number of experts recruited primarily from our networks. as the size
of our panel ﬁtted the exploratory nature of delphi studies, but is rather small for statistical purposes,
we cannot formally exclude the presence of biases in the panel and, thus, cannot make formal claims
regarding the representativeness of the results. therefore, the differences in comparative relevance for
24opportunities and challenges should be seen as trend statements whose underlying causality needs to
be further substantiated (könig et al., 2019). nevertheless, the structured approach that was followed
to compose the panel (with explicit selection criteria), together with the positive feedback and high
satisfaction throughout the study, support our conﬁdence in the validity of the results. a potential bias in
the current panel’s view could be offset by replicating the study.
secondly, to safeguard the holistic nature of the study, we did not formally require that opportunities
and challenges are exclusive to pm. nonetheless, they needed to have a speciﬁc relevance for pm or a
speciﬁc interpretation in the context of pm. this was also communicated to the panel. however, we did
not systematically require experts to elaborate on this matter. a more detailed investigation on this matter
would be useful, especially for the challenges. having a thorough insight into the speciﬁc relevance of
a challenge for pm can unearth its root causes, which would pinpoint the aspects that future research
should tackle. while this constitutes a valuable area for future research, it should be stressed that the
presence of items in table 3 and 4 in our study clearly reﬂects that they are of particular interest for pm
according to the panel.
finally, while the rating results are valuable to gain insights into the comparative relevance of items,
we have no insights into the reasons why a particular rating was given. this would have been especially
interesting for items where substantial discrepancies between academics and practitioners were observed.
gathering an explanation for each rating would imply a substantial additional effort on the part of the
experts, which we considered infeasible given the already signiﬁcant time investment required to partic-
ipate in the study. hence, consistent with the exploratory nature of delphi studies, further research will
be required to gain profound insights into the exact motivations behind the provided ratings, considering
the possibility that academics and practitioners in our study may have employed different benchmarks
for their ratings.
6 conclusion and outlook
pm is an active research domain and the developed techniques have been successfully applied to un-
derstand and improve business processes. as a research ﬁeld, the focus of pm is mainly situated on
technical topics such as the development and evaluation of algorithms. however, to support the uptake
of these algorithms, as well as of (non-)commercial tools, it is also important to gain insights into the
use of pm in organisations. until now, a holistic understanding of the opportunities and challenges of
25using pm in organisations is missing. against this background, this study provides a structured overview
of such opportunities and challenges based on a delphi study with a panel of academic and industry ex-
perts. moreover, it conveys insights regarding the comparative relevance of opportunities and challenges,
distinguishing the views of academics and practitioners.
the implications for academics in section 5.1 already highlighted several prominent challenges for
future research, including conducting dedicated research on various topics regarding the organisational
use of pm. besides these recommendations, this study opens additional avenues for future research.
firstly, replications of the study with different experts would enable the assessment of the generalis-
ability of the results, or might shed light on sectoral or international differences when experts from a
speciﬁc sector or speciﬁc region are purposefully selected. after several iterations with different panels,
a meta-analysis can be conducted to synthesise the ﬁndings. secondly, future work could study the spe-
ciﬁc relevance or interpretation of various opportunities and challenges for pm in more detail, as well
as the reasoning behind their associated ratings (e.g., by conducting in-depth interviews with experts or
further case studies). these motivations could be used to gain more profound insights into each of the
items, as well as to explain the observed differences in the views of academics and practitioners. thirdly,
more research is needed to understand the relationship between different opportunities and challenges.
the current study does not consider such interconnections due to its exploratory nature. studying the
relationship between items can show that beneﬁting from an opportunity might make particular chal-
lenges more prominent, requiring integrated action. fourthly, the results of our study could function as
a stepping stone to develop pm maturity models and pm project portfolio management methods. the
extent to which an organisation can seize the opportunities and the challenges reﬂects its maturity. once
maturity levels have been established, guidelines can be developed for organisations to become more
mature pm users. in the same vein, the results of this study could guide the development of pm project
management and project portfolio management methods, insofar as the identiﬁed challenges are likely
to recur across projects, while the opportunities can inform the selection, prioritisation, and scoping of
pm projects. finally, a regular update of the overview of opportunities and challenges is valuable to
investigate whether the included items or their comparative relevance will change as pm research and
practice are still rapidly advancing.
26references
agostinelli, s., maggi, f. m., marrella, a., and milani, f. (2019). a user evaluation of process dis-
covery algorithms in a software engineering company. in proceedings of the ieee enterprise
distributed object computing conference , pages 142–150.
andrews, r., wynn, m. t., vallmuur, k., ter hofstede, a. h., and bosley, e. (2020). a comparative pro-
cess mining analysis of road trauma patient pathways. international journal of environmental
research and public health , 17(10):3426.
augusto, a., conforti, r., dumas, m., la rosa, m., maggi, f. m., marrella, a., mecella, m., and soo,
a. (2018). automated discovery of process models from event logs: : review and benchmark.
ieee transactions on knowledge and data engineering , 31(4):686–705.
becker, j., brocke, j. v., heddier, m., and seidel, s. (2015). in search of information systems (grand)
challenges: a community of inquirers perspective. business & information systems engineering .
bland, m. (2015). an introduction to medical statistics , volume 4. oxford university press (uk).
carmona, j., van dongen, b., solti, a., and weidlich, m. (2018). conformance checking . springer,
heidelberg.
chiudinelli, l., dagliati, a., tibollo, v ., albasini, s., geifman, n., peek, n., holmes, j. h., corsi, f.,
bellazzi, r., and sacchi, l. (2020). mining post-surgical care processes in breast cancer patients.
artiﬁcial intelligence in medicine , 105:101855.
claes, j. and poels, g. (2013). process mining and the prom framework: an exploratory survey. lecture
notes in business information processing , 132.
de bruin, t. and rosemann, m. (2007). using the delphi technique to identify bpm capability areas.
inproceedings of the 2007 australasian conference on information systems , pages 643–653.
drakoulogkonas, p. and apostolou, d. (2021). on the selection of process mining tools. electronics ,
10(4):451.
dumas, m., rosa, m. l., mendling, j., and reijers, h. a. (2018). fundamentals of business process
management . springer, heidelberg.
27emamjome, f., andrews, r., and ter hofstede, a. h. m. (2019). a case study lens on process mining
in practice. lecture notes in computer science , 11877:127–145.
fischer, d. a., goel, k., andrews, r., van dun, c. g. j., wynn, m. t., and röglinger, m. (2020).
enhancing event log quality: detecting and quantifying timestamp imperfections. lecture
notes in computer science , 12168:309–326.
galic, g. and wolf (2021). global process mining survey 2021: delivering value with process analytics –
adoption and success factors of process mining. https://www2.deloitte.com/de/de/pages/
finance/articles/global-process-mining-survey-2021.html , accessed on 6 july 2021.
ghazal, m. a., ibrahim, o., and salama, m. a. (2017). educational process mining: a systematic liter-
ature review. in proceedings of the 2017 ieee european conference on electrical engineering
and computer science , pages 198–203.
grisold, t., mendling, j., otto, m., and vom brocke, j. (2020). adoption, use and management of
process mining in practice. business process management journal , 27(2):369–387.
gupta, u. g. and clarke, r. e. (1996). theory and applications of the delphi technique. technological
forecasting and social change , 53(2):185 – 211.
heckman, j. j. (2010). selection bias and self-selection. in durlauf, s. n. and blume, l. e., editors,
microeconometrics , volume 24, pages 242–266. palgrave macmillan, london.
hspi (2020). process mining: a database of applications. https://www.hspi.it/wp-content/
uploads/2020/01/hspi_process_mining_database2020.pdf , accessed on 3 february
2020.
indulska, m., green, p. f., recker, j., and rosemann, m. (2009). business process modeling: perceived
beneﬁts. lecture notes in computer science , 5829:458–471.
keeney, s., hasson, f., and mckenna, h. (2006). consulting the oracle: ten lessons from using the
delphi technique in nursing research. journal of advanced nursing , 53(2):205–212.
kerpedzhiev, g. d., könig, u. m., röglinger, m., and rosemann, m. (2021). an exploration into future
business process management capabilities in view of digitalization. business & information
28systems engineering , 63(2):83–96.
kerremans, m., searle, s., srivastava, t., and iijima, k. (2020). market guide for process
mining. https://www.gartner.com/en/documents/3991229/market-guide-for-process
-mining , accessed on 7 october 2020.
könig, u. m., linhart, a., and röglinger, m. (2019). why do business processes deviate? business
research , 12(2):425–453.
koplowitz, r. (2020). now tech: process mining and documentation. https://
www.forrester.com/report/now+tech+process+mining+and+documentation+q1+2020/
-/e-res158955# , accessed on 5 february 2020.
kratsch, w., manderscheid, j., and röglinger, m. (2020). machine learning in business process mon-
itoring: a comparison of deep learning and classical approaches used for outcome prediction.
business & information systems engineering , 63(3):261–276.
lang, m., wiesche, m., and krcmar, h. (2018). criteria for selecting cloud service providers: a delphi
study of quality-of-service attributes. information & management , 55(6):746–758.
mahendrawathi, e., astuti, h. m., and nastiti, a. (2015). analysis of customer fulﬁlment with process
mining: a case study in a telecommunication company. procedia computer science , 72:588–
596.
mans, r., reijers, h. a., berends, h., bandara, w., and prince, r. (2013). business process mining
success. in proceedings of the 2013 european conference on information systems , page 89.
martin, n., depaire, b., and caris, a. (2016). the use of process mining in business process simulation
model construction. business & information systems engineering , 58(1):73–87.
mehta, c. r. and patel, n. r. (1983). a network algorithm for performing fisher’s exact test in r c
contingency tables. journal of the american statistical association , 78(382):427–434.
moghaddam, a. (2006). coding issues in grounded theory. issues in educational research , 16(1):52–
66.
okoli, c. and pawlowski, s. d. (2004). the delphi method as a research tool: an example, design
29considerations and applications. information & management , 42(1):15 – 29.
paré, g., cameron, a., poba-nzaou, p., and templier, m. (2013). a systematic assessment of rigor in
information systems ranking-type delphi studies. information management , 50:207–217.
partington, a., wynn, m., suriadi, s., ouyang, c., and karnon, j. (2015). process mining for clinical
processes: a comparative analysis of four australian hospitals. acm transactions on manage-
ment information systems , 5(4):1–18.
rad, m. s., nilashi, m., and dahlan, h. m. (2018). information technology adoption: a review of the
literature and classiﬁcation. universal access in the information society , 17(2):361–390.
reinkemeyer, l. (2020). process mining in action: principles, use cases and outlook . springer,
heidelberg.
rojas, e., munoz-gama, j., sepúlveda, m., and capurro, d. (2016). process mining in healthcare.
journal of biomedical informatics , 61:224–236.
rosemann, m. and vom brocke, j., editors (2015a). handbook on business process management 1 .
springer berlin heidelberg, berlin, heidelberg.
rosemann, m. and vom brocke, j., editors (2015b). handbook on business process management 2 .
springer berlin heidelberg, berlin, heidelberg.
rosemann, m. and vom brocke, j. (2015c). the six core elements of business process management. in
rosemann, m. and vom brocke, j., editors, handbook on business process management 1 , pages
105–122. springer, heidelberg.
schmidt, r. (1997). managing delphi surveys using nonparametric statistical techniques. decision
sciences , 28:763–774.
schmidt, r., lyytinen, k., keil, m., and cule, p. (2001). identifying software project risks. journal of
management information systems , 17:5–36.
schmiedel, t., vom brocke, j., and recker, j. (2013). which cultural values matter to business process
management? business process management journal , 19:292–317.
skinner, d., nelson, r., chin, w., and land, l. (2015). the delphi method research strategy in studies
30of information systems. communications of the association for information systems , 37:31–63.
song, m. and van der aalst, w. m. p. (2008). towards comprehensive support for organizational
mining. decision support systems , 46(1):300–317.
syed, r., leemans, s. j. j., eden, r., and buijs, j. a. c. m. (2020). process mining adoption: a
technology continuity versus discontinuity perspective. lecture notes in business information
processing , 392:229–245.
teinemaa, i., dumas, m., rosa, m. l., and maggi, f. m. (2019). outcome-oriented predictive process
monitoring. acm transactions on knowledge discovery from data , 13(2):1–57.
thiede, m., fuerstenau, d., and barquet, a. p. b. (2018). how is process mining technology used by
organizations? business process management journal , 24(4):900–922.
turner, c. j., tiwari, a., olaiya, r., and xu, y . (2012). process mining: from theory to practice.
business process management journal , 18(3):493–512.
van der aalst, w. m. p. (2016). process mining: data science in action . springer, heidelberg.
van der aalst, w. m. p., adriansyah, a., ..., and wynn, m. (2012). process mining manifesto. lecture
notes in business information processing , 99:169–194.
van looy, a., de backer, m., and poels, g. (2014). a conceptual framework and classiﬁcation of
capability areas for business process maturity. enterprise information systems , 8(2):188–224.
van looy, a., poels, g., and snoeck, m. (2017). evaluating business process maturity models. journal
of the association for information systems , 18(6):461–486.
vom brocke, j. and mendling, j., editors (2018). business process management cases . springer inter-
national publishing, cham.
von der gracht, h. a. (2012). consensus measurement in delphi studies. technological forecasting
and social change , 79(8):1525–1536.
31a appendix a: demographic information about the delphi panel
table 7: demographic information about the delphi panel
academics 17 practitioners 23country of main activityaustralia 2 australia 1
belgium 2 belgium -
canada 1 canada -
chile 2 chile -
finland - finland 1
germany - germany 8
israel 1 israel -
italy 2 italy 2
japan - japan 1
the netherlands 2 the netherlands 6
norway 1 norway -
slovakia - slovakia 1
south korea 1 south korea -
spain 2 spain -
switzerland - switzerland 1
united states of america 1 united states of america 2experienceyears holding a phd years of work experience
>10 9 >10 19
5-10 6 5-10 2
<5 2 <5 2
years of pm research years of pm experience
>10 7 >10 8
5-10 10 5-10 7
<5 0 >5 8backgroundphd discipline job position
computer science 9 department head 7
information systems 3 director 7
pm 2 business consultant/analyst 5
business administration 1 cxo 3
industrial engineering 1 project manager 1
business process management 1employees>1,000 13
101-1,000 3
10-100 5
<10 2
32b appendix b: delphi study procedure
b.1 round 1 – brainstorming of opportunities and challenges
in round 1, which was conducted between 14 and 21 may 2020, we provided the experts with a motiva-
tion for the study, including the key design decisions. additionally, we provided background information
on pm and encouraged them to assume a holistic view on pm by brieﬂy referring to the bpm core el-
ements (de bruin and rosemann, 2007). in line with the chosen greenﬁeld approach, we asked 40
experts to name at least ﬁve speciﬁc challenges and opportunities for the use of pm in organisations. we
also asked for short descriptions (1-3 sentences) to facilitate the coding and also gathered demographic
information about the experts. we also used the ﬁrst questionnaire to gather further background infor-
mation on the panellists (see appendix a) and to conﬁrm they meet the selection criteria (okoli and
pawlowski, 2004). in total, we received 215 opportunities and 211 challenges, which we consolidated
into 28 opportunities and 27 challenges in the coding procedure. we grouped the consolidated opportu-
nities and challenges along the six core elements of bpm and developed pm-centred deﬁnitions of the
core elements (section 3). thereby, we merged the core elements methods anditto acknowledge the
tight link between methods andittools in the digital age (kerpedzhiev et al., 2021). also, we further
grouped opportunities in that core element along the bpm lifecycle phases to account for the speciﬁc
ideas represented in them (dumas et al., 2018). here, we merged the phases process redesign andprocess
implementation as the expert input that related to these phases was closely intertwined.
b.2 round 2 – validation of opportunities and challenges
in round 2, which was conducted between 1 and 7 june 2020, we asked the 40 experts that took part in
the initial round to validate the coded challenges and opportunities. of the 40 invited experts, 37 partici-
pated in this round. the panellists received general background information on the study, information on
the coding procedure and relevant decisions, their input from round 1, and the coded challenges and op-
portunities in a random order (paré et al., 2013). additionally, we provided the experts with the relevant
pm-centred deﬁnitions of the categories in which the items were grouped. we asked for comments as
33well as for suggestions for further challenges and opportunities. based on the input in this round, which
also included new ideas, we slightly decreased the aggregation level of the items compared to that of the
opportunities and challenges in round 1. thus, the coding in this round resulted in 36 opportunities and
33 challenges. in this round, we retained the established categories for the items introduced in the coding
in round 1. in round 2, we also received initial coding and overall satisfaction ratings from the experts.
b.3 round 3 – narrowing down of opportunities and challenges
round 3, conducted between 15 and 21 june 2020, intended to reduce the challenges and opportunities
to a manageable number for the rating phase. as outlined in section 3, we invited all 40 experts that
had participated in round 1 and round 2 or just in round 1 to this round. 35 of those participated
in round 3. the questionnaire for this round included general information on the study as well as
remarks regarding the processing of items in the ﬁrst two rounds. in terms of the voting procedure, we
implemented a negative selection by asking experts to vote out those ten challenges and opportunities
they deemed least relevant for the use of pm. we did this to reduce the cognitive load on the experts
since a positive selection would have implied a higher number of items to be chosen by each expert. the
number of items for the negative selection granted the experts sufﬁcient degrees of freedom since they
represented roughly a third of the number of challenges and opportunities. after receiving the votes of
the experts, we eliminated items that were voted out by more than 50% of the panel and kept the rest as
an input for the rating phase of the study (paré et al., 2013). applying this simple selection rule ensured
a manageable number of shortlisted items (30 opportunities and 32 challenges) and also meant that very
few items were eliminated (6 opportunities and 1 challenge) in accordance with the holistic purpose of
the study and the diversity of the input. based on the initial satisfaction ratings in round 2, in round
3 the mean coding satisfaction increased from 6.11 to 6.34, and the overall satisfaction increased from
6.16 to 6.43.
34b.4 round 4 – rating of opportunities and challenges
in round 4, which was conducted between 26 june and 2 july 2020, we initiated the rating phase of the
study to gain insights into the comparative relevance of the opportunities and challenges. 32 of the 35
invited experts that had taken part in round 3 participated in round 4. as in the previous rounds, the
questionnaire for this round included general information on the study as well as detailed instructions
on the rating procedure. we invited the experts to rate all shortlisted challenges and opportunities in
terms of their relative relevance using the following ordinal scale: “extremely relevant", “moderately
relevant", “somewhat relevant", and “irrelevant". we included rating category “irrelevant" for cross-
checking purposes to account for the case that individual panellists may still have considered certain
shortlisted challenges and opportunities as irrelevant even if they had not been eliminated in round
3. this indeed occurred, but very seldom as table 3 and table 4 suggest. if it would have occurred
systematically, we would have repeated the narrowing down procedure. we informed the experts that
this category was used for cross-checking purposes to prevent them from perceiving the scale as non-
equidistant. in round 4, the study satisfaction increased to 6.53 while the coding satisfaction with the
ﬁnal lists of challenges and opportunities remained constant. note that experts were not requested to
justify their ratings given the exploratory nature of the study and the efforts which were already asked
from the experts throughout the study.
b.5 round 5 – rating of opportunities and challenges
starting from round 5, which was conducted between 8 and 14 july 2020, we divided the panel into
an academic and industry subpanel to gain insights into potential differences in the perceived relative
relevance between the two groups of experts. all 32 experts who had taken part in round 4 also partic-
ipated in this round. the questionnaire for round 5 included the same general information on the study
as round 4. for the ﬁrst time, experts were confronted with the aggregated rating distribution of the
relevant subpanel they were in resulting from round 4. by providing this information, we intended to
calibrate the experts’ understanding of the relative relevance of each item within the respective subpanel.
35based on the additional rating information we asked experts to reconsider their initial rating from round
4 only in case they deemed it necessary. in this round, we noticed a very slight drop in the mean study
satisfaction, which amounted to 6.47.
b.6 round 6 – rating of opportunities and challenges
round 6, conducted between 17 and 23 july 2020, was a conceptual repetition of round 5. again, we
provided experts with the same information on the study as well as the updated item distributions in the
relevant subpanel and asked them to reconsider their ratings if deemed necessary. all 32 experts from
round 5 took part in this round. round 6 resulted in the highest study satisfaction of 6.67 as well as the
lowest standard deviation (0.47). due to the slight difference in the satisfaction between rounds 5 and
6, as well as the fact that we had conducted three rating rounds, we decided to terminate the study in
accordance with the established termination condition (paré et al., 2013). in addition to the quantitative
measures, the convergence of the results was supported by the received qualitative feedback.
36c appendix c: overall and coding satisfaction
table 8: overall and coding satisfaction
expert category round 1 round 2 round 3 round 4 round 5 round 6
id p os cs os cs os cs os os
1 practitioner yes - - - - - - - -
2 academic yes 7 7 - - - - - -
3 practitioner yes 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7
4 academic yes 7 7 6 6 7 7 6 6
5 practitioner yes 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7
6 academic yes 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6
7 practitioner yes 6 6 6 7 7 7 7 7
8 practitioner yes 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 6
9 academic yes 5 5 6 6 6 7 6 7
10 academic yes 6 6 7 6 7 7 7 7
11 practitioner yes 7 6 7 6 6 6 6 7
12 academic yes 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6
13 practitioner yes 6 6 6 5 5 5 4 6
14 practitioner yes 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7
15 practitioner yes 2 4 6 6 7 7 6 7
16 practitioner yes 7 6 7 7 7 7 7 7
17 practitioner yes 6 6 - - - - - -
18 academic yes 5 5 7 7 7 6 6 7
19 practitioner yes - - - - - - - -
20 academic yes 7 6 7 6 6 6 7 7
21 academic yes 6 6 6 2 7 7 7 7
22 practitioner yes 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7
23 academic yes 6 5 6 6 6 6 7 7
24 academic yes - - 2 6 6 4 6 6
25 practitioner yes 6 7 6 6 7 7 6 6
26 academic yes 6 6 7 6 7 7 6 7
27 academic yes 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7
28 practitioner yes 6 6 - - - - - -
29 academic yes 6 7 7 7 7 7 7 6
30 practitioner yes 7 7 7 7 7 6 7 7
31 academic yes 6 7 7 7 6 7 6 7
32 practitioner yes 4 6 5 6 6 4 6 7
33 academic yes 6 3 6 6 6 4 6 7
34 practitioner yes 7 6 7 7 - - - -
35 practitioner yes 4 4 7 7 - - - -
36 practitioner yes 6 6 6 6 6 6 7 6
37 academic yes 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7
38 practitioner yes 7 6 7 6 6 5 7 6
39 practitioner yes 6 6 6 7 6 7 6 6
40 practitioner yes 7 7 7 7 - - - -
p = participation in round 1; os = overall study satisfaction; cs = coding satisfaction
37d appendix d: detailed statistics on opportunities and challenges
table 9: shortlisted opportunities for the use of pm in organisations
a p a pid strategic alignment er mr sr irmedian median mode modep-value
o.1enabling inter-organisational value
creation**
mr er mr er 0.0026
o.2 facilitating strategic decision-making
 mr mr mr mr 0.8592
o.3 supporting digital transformation***
 mr er mr er 0.0009
governance
o.4maintaining an up-to-date business
process repository
mr mr,sr mr sr 0.1121
o.5 supporting data management
 mr mr mr mr 0.3788
methods/it - overall
o.6complementing management ap-
proaches and techniques
mr mr mr er 0.0541
o.7 supporting it management
 mr mr mr mr 0.7976
methods/it - process discovery
o.8accelerating as-is business process
modelling*
mr er mr er 0.0290
o.9enhancing business process trans-
parency
er er er er 1.0000
methods/it - process analysis
o.10analysing business processes from the
resource perspective
er er er er 0.4425
o.11analysing business process variants
and exceptions*
er er er er 0.0434
o.12understanding business process com-
pliance
er er er er 0.3326
o.13 detecting business process drift*
 mr er,mr mr er 0.0199
o.14enabling business process comparison
and benchmarking
er er er er 0.5947
o.15enhancing business process risk man-
agement
mr mr mr mr 0.2340
o.16 identifying business process waste
 er er er er 1.0000
methods/it - process redesign and implementation
o.17enabling business process automa-
tion*
mr mr er mr 0.0484
o.18enhancing business process improve-
ment and redesign
er er er er 1.0000
o.19improving resource assignment in
business processes**
er mr er mr 0.0083
methods/it - process monitoring and controlling
o.20 enabling decision-making at run-time
 er mr er er 0.0830
o.21evaluating business process perfor-
mance
er er er er 0.2258
o.22predicting outcomes of running
cases**
er,mr er er,mr er 0.0024
people
o.23 enhancing employee training*
 sr mr sr mr 0.0420
o.24enriching domain knowledge through
data
er,mr mr er,mr er 0.3878
o.25generating intuitive visualisations for
business users
er er er er 0.0687
o.26 supporting knowledge management
 er mr er mr 0.2148
culture
o.27fostering a business process- and data-
centric mindset
mr er mr er 0.2890
o.28fostering a continuous improvement
mindset***
mr er mr er 0.0001
o.29nurturing evidence-based communica-
tion and decision-making
er er er er 0.1400
o.30supporting a culture of customer cen-
tricity
sr mr sr mr 0.0674
a: academics(
 ); p: practitioners(
 ); er: extremely relevant; mr: moderately relevant; sr: slightly relevant; ir: irrelevant;
signiﬁcance codes: p <0.001: ***, p <0.01: **, p <0.05: *;
38table 10: shortlisted challenges for the use of pm in organisations
a p a pid strategic alignment er mr sr irmedian median mode modep-value
c.1 elusive business value
 er mr er mr 0.1804
c.2 lack of management support
 er er er er 0.0829
c.3 unclear success factors
 er,mr mr er mr 0.4366
governance
c.4 constraining data access barriers
 er,mr mr er mr 0.0776
c.5lack of interdisciplinary and cross-
functional teams*
mr er mr er 0.0194
c.6 missing implementation guidance
 mr mr mr mr 0.5892
c.7 poor data quality*
 er er er er 0.0373
c.8 restricting data privacy regulations
 mr mr mr mr 0.1849
c.9 unavailability of data***
 er mr er mr 0.0002
c.10 unclear organisational anchoring***
 sr mr sr mr 0.0008
methods/it
c.11challenging (real-time) system inte-
gration**
mr mr mr er 0.0218
c.12 complex data preparation
 er er er er 0.1612
c.13 difﬁcult analysis of process exceptions
 mr mr mr mr 0.5424
c.14 difﬁcult handling of unstructured data
 mr mr mr er 0.0630
c.15 fragmented solutions**
 mr sr mr sr 0.0031
c.16 incomprehensible outcomes***
 er sr er sr 0.0002
c.17 insufﬁcient prescriptive capabilities
 mr mr mr sr 0.3831
c.18 lack of advanced features
 mr mr sr sr 1.0000
c.19underrepresentation of declarative
models
mr sr mr sr 0.0659
people
c.20 insufﬁcient domain expertise
 er,mr mr er mr 0.8824
c.21 insufﬁcient analytical skills
 er mr er er 0.1164
c.22 insufﬁcient technical skills**
 er mr er mr 0.0071
culture
c.23 aversion to transparency
 er mr er mr 0.2585
c.24 insufﬁcient data orientation***
 er mr,sr er sr 0.0002
c.25 insufﬁcient process orientation***
 er mr er mr 0.0010
c.26 invasive work monitoring
 mr mr mr mr 0.2480
c.27 lack of continuous incorporation
 mr mr mr mr 0.1351
c.28 lack of trust in insights
 er mr er mr 0.0619
c.29 misleading overconﬁdence
 mr mr mr mr 0.6601
c.30 resistance to change
 mr er mr er 0.0732
c.31 unsubstantiated expectations
 mr mr er mr 0.8153
c.32unwillingness to share domain knowl-
edge*
mr sr mr sr 0.0323
a: academics(
 ); p: practitioners(
 ); er: extremely relevant; mr: moderately relevant; sr: slightly relevant; ir: irrelevant;
signiﬁcance codes: p <0.001: ***, p <0.01: **, p <0.05: *;
e appendix e: mapping of results and related literature
the tables in this appendix relate the shortlisted opportunities and challenges from our study to closely
related papers from the state-of-the-art in literature. in particular, claes and poels (2013), mans et al.
39(2013), syed et al. (2020) and grisold et al. (2020) are incorporated as they investigate the use of pm in
organisations without starting from a particular use case. given the value of targeted pm case studies,
but taking into account that a full review of these case studies is beyond the scope of this paper, we also
took the recent textbook by reinkemeyer (2020) into consideration. this textbook reports on twelve pm
cases from various application areas.
it should be noted that it is not trivial to map items from different studies due to their variety regarding
the level of granularity. consequently, a distinction has been made between items which are directly
related and items which are indirectly related. the latter category refers to items from literature which
are somewhat related to items in our delphi study, but are speciﬁed e.g. at a different level of granularity.
as follows from the tables, 4 opportunities and 10 challenges could be directly related to items in
closely related papers from the state-of-the-art in literature. 18 opportunities and 22 challenges are indi-
rectly related, but are speciﬁed e.g. at a different level of granularity. 12 opportunities and 9 challenges
from our study did not explicitly come forward in any of the considered papers.
40table 11: mapping of opportunities to related literature
synthesis related literature
id opportunity directly
relatedindirectly
related[1] grisold
et al. 2020[2] syed
et al. 2020[3] mans
et al. 2013[4] claes and
poels 2013[5] reinke-
meyer 2020
o.1enabling inter-organisational value
creation
o.2 facilitating strategic decision making
o.3 supporting digital transformation [5]bmw
epd
o.4maintaining an up-to-date business
process repository
o.5 supporting data management
o.6complementing management ap-
proaches and techniques[4],[5]predict/simulate
find causesbmw
bayer
o.7 supporting it management
o.8accelerating as-is-business process
modeling[4] [5]objectivity
speed
little effortuber
bosch
o.9enhancing business process trans-
parency[4] [5]transparency
visualathenahealth
o.10analysing business processes from the
resource perspective[4] different views
o.11analysing business process variants
and exceptions[4],[5] variations epd
o.12understanding business process com-
pliance[4] [5]conformance
auditepd
audit
o.13 detecting business process drift
o.14enabling business process comparison
and benchmarking
o.15enhancing business process risk man-
agement[5] bayer
o.16 identifying business process waste [4],[5] bottlenecks athenahealth
o.17 enabling business process automation [5]siemens
uber
bmw
epd
athenahealth
bosch
bayer
o.18enhancing business process improve-
ment and redesign[5]siemens
bmw
epd
abb
o.19improving resource assignment in
business processes
o.20 enabling decision-making at run-time [5] schukat
o.21evaluating business process perfor-
mance[4],[5] metrics abb
o.22 predicting outcomes of running cases [4],[5] predict/simulate uber
o.23enriching domain knowledge through
data[2]actionable
insights
o.24 enhancing employee training
o.25generating intuitive visualisations for
business users[4] visual
o.26 supporting knowledge management
o.27fostering a business process- and data-
centric mindset
o.28fostering a continuous improvement
mindset[1]business value
is created when
pm is used to
(continuously)
analyze business
processes
o.29nurturing evidence-based communica-
tion and decision-making[1] [5]decisions can
be made based
on evidence
through real
datasiemens
o.30supporting a culture of customer cen-
tricity
count of opportunities with related items
from literature4 18
unmapped itemscompleteness
accessibility
bottom-up6
6these items were not mapped because the paper did not provide a description of their meaning.
41table 12: mapping of challenges and related literature
synthesis related literature
id challenge directly
relatedindirectly
related[1] grisold et al. 2020 [2] syed et al. 2020 [3] mans et al. 2013[4] claes and
poels 2013[5] reinkemeyer 2020
c.1 elusive business value [1],[5] [2],[4]process managers
do not know how to
calculate the
business value of
process mining
activitiesperceived beneﬁtshard to sell
costbmw
c.2 lack of management support [1],[3],[5]they need guidance
to convince
decision-makersmanagement
supportabb
c.3 unclear success factors
c.4 constraining data access barriers [1],[2],[4] [5]there is an
asymmetry in terms
of the permission to
access and use of
relevant datadata & information
qualitydata access epd
c.5lack of interdisciplinary and cross-
functional teams[1],[2],[5]teams who are
responsible for data
integration often
have difﬁculties to
obtain the data since
they are not
involved in the
decision-makingcollaborative
tensionsathenahealthcare
epd
c.6 missing implementation guidance [4] [1],[3],[5]it is unclear what
process properties
are importantproject management intuitive/guidancebmw
athenahealthcare
siemens
abb
c.7 poor data quality [2],[4] [1],[3],[5]it needs to be
ensured that data has
high quality and is
completedata & information
qualitydata and event log
qualitydata qualityschukat
siemens
healthineers
bayer
c.8 restricting data privacy regulations [1],[5]there should be a
transparent data
policybayer
c.9 unavailability of data [1]a sufﬁcient amount
of data must exist
c.10 unclear organisational anchoring [2] [5] governanceuber
abb
c.11challenging (real-time) system inte-
gration[4] integration
c.12 complex data preparation [4] [1],[5]there are data
fractions when
process runs on
different systemsdata preparation
costssiemens
athenahealthcare
siemens
healthineers
c.13 difﬁcult analysis of process exceptions
c.14 difﬁcult handling of unstructured data
c.15 fragmented solutions [4],[5] integrationsiemens
healthineers
c.16 incomprehensible outcomes [4] [2]process
complexitieshard to understand
spaghetti models
hard to explain
c.17 insufﬁcient prescriptive capabilities [5] telekom
c.18 lack of advanced features [4] only as-is
c.19underrepresentation of declarative
models
c.20 insufﬁcient domain expertise [1],[3]process managers
miss information
about how certain
variables can inform
decision-makingresource
availability
c.21 insufﬁcient analytical skills
c.22 insufﬁcient technical skills [2] [3],[4],[5] user-related pm expertise too many optionsbmw
epd
siemens
healthineers
bayer
c.23 aversion to transparency [1],[5]it is important to
cope with the
increased
transparency created
through process
miningbmw
abb
c.24 insufﬁcient data orientation
c.25 insufﬁcient process orientation
c.26 invasive work monitoring [1]transparency may
lead to distrust and
perceived
surveillance
c.27 lack of continuous incorporation [5] schukat
c.28 lack of trust in insights [2] [4] technical reliability
c.29 misleading overconﬁdence
c.30 resistence to change [2],[5] user tailoredness uber
c.31 unsubstantiated expecations [5] telekom
c.32unwilligness to share domain knowl-
edge
count of challenges with related items from
literature10 22
unmapped itemstool limitations
performance7
7these items were not mapped because the paper did not provide a description of their meaning.
42