rethinking the input for process
mining: insights from the xes survey and workshop
moe thandar wynn1, julian lebherz2, wil van der aalst3,
rafael accorsi4, claudio di ciccio5, lakmali jayarathna1, and h.m.w. v erbeek6
1queensland university of technology, brisbane, australia,
{m.wynn,lakmali.herathjayarathna}@qut.edu.au
2a.p . møller-mærsk, denmark, ieee_tfpm_sc@lebherz.me
3rwth aachen university, germany, wvdaalst@pads.rwth-aachen.de
4accenture, switzerland, rafael.accorsi@accenture.com
5sapienza university of rome, italy, claudio.diciccio@uniroma1.it
6eindhoven university of technology, the netherlands, h.m.w.verbeek@tue.nl
abstract. although the popularity and adoption of process mining techniques grew
rapidly in recent years, a large portion of effort invested in process mining initiatives is
still consumed by event data extraction and transformation rather than process analysis.
the ieee task force on process mining conducted a study focused on the challenges
faced during event data preparation (from source data to event log). this paper presents
findings from the online survey with 289participants spanning the roles of practition-
ers, researchers, software vendors, and end-users. these findings were presented at
the xes 2.0 workshop co-located with the 3rd international conference on process
mining. the workshop also hosted presentations from various stakeholder groups and
a discussion panel on the future of xes and the input needed for process mining.
this paper summarises the main findings of both the survey and the workshop. these
outcomes help us to accelerate and improve the standardisation process, hopefully
leading to a new standard widely adopted by both academia and industry.
key words: process mining, xes, event data, data transformation
1 introduction
it is well known that data pre-processing is the most time-consuming task of a process mining
project. the xes workshop, organised by the ieee task force on process mining xes
working group, aims to seek contributions from process mining vendors and researchers on
the challenges faced in curating data input for process mining projects. the scope of the
workshop covers the different aspects of the data input pipeline, starting from the raw event
data to generating an event log (e.g., data curation, data cleaning, data standardisation). the
intended outcome is a collection of data-related challenges and potential solutions to address
these challenges. this paper summarises the main findings from this initiative.
the rest of the paper is organised as follows: section 2 provides an overview of the current
ieee standard for extensible event stream (xes). section 3 describes the key insights from
the online survey, while section 4 synthesises the discussion on the day of the xes workshop.
section 5 concludes the paper.
pre-print copy of the manuscript published by springer (available at link.springer.com )
identiﬁed by doi:10.1007/978-3-030-98581-3_12 wynn et al.
2 xes standard: a brief overview
mxml (mining extensible markup language), defined in 2003, was the first process mining
standard to exchange event data [ 1]. due to its limitations, the standardisation for new format
called xes started in 2009 supported by the ieee task force on process mining. already
in the first meeting of the task force on september 15th 2010 at the stevens institute of
technology in hoboken usa there was consensus to establish xes as an official standard.
the xes standard was adopted by the ieee standards association (sa) as the “ieee
standard for extensible event stream (xes) for achieving interoperability in event logs
and event streams” [2] in 2016.
after the adoption of the xes standard by the ieee, work was done on creating new
extensions to the xes standard. the conceptual model of xes introduces components (logs,
traces, events, and attributes) that may all contain attributes. every such attribute is represented
as a key-value mapping, where the value is assigned according to the attribute’s type (string,
timestamp, integer, real, boolean, id, or list).
the purpose of the extensions was, and still is, to provide semantics to the attribute keys. a
typical example for this is the “ concept:name ” key, which is generally considered to be the
name of the corresponding activity (for an event) or the name of the corresponding case (for
a trace). however, to provide this key with semantics, the concept extension needs to be
included in the xes log, as, by default, keys have no fixed semantics. to provide semantics to
some basic attributes, the xes standard comes with a collection of standard extensions1. the
concept extension is a typical example thereof, and the standard additionally includes the
lifecycle ,time ,organizational , and cost . in the end, this work led to the adoption
of a number of additional extensions by the xes working group (wg), like micro in 2016,
software in 2017, and artifact lifecycle in 2018.
however, the adoption of the xes standard by the different software tools in the process
mining community remained low. also, whenever a tool claimed to support the xes standard
it was often unclear to what extent it supported the xes standard. to provide a better overview
of this support of the xes standard, the xes working group initiated a xes certification
process in 2017. as a result, at the time of writing twelve process mining tools2have been cer-
tified by the xes wg as supporting the xes standard. the xes standard helped to progress
the field of process mining. it led to consensus about core concepts [ 1] and many publicly avail-
able event logs were made available for competitions and benchmarks. however, adoption in
industry is limited, mostly due to the verbosity of the xml serialisation of xes. moreover, the
extraction and pre-processing of event data is still seen as a limiting factor for process mining.
3 survey design and insights
to investigate the challenges faced during event data preparation for process mining, we con-
ducted an online survey collecting the insights from the process mining community from var-
ious roles (i.e., academia, professional services, software vendors, and commercial end users).
1www.tf-pm.org/resources/xes-standard/about-xes/standard-extensions
2www.tf-pm.org/resources/xes-standard/for-vendors/certification/tools
pre-print copy of the manuscript published by springer (available at link.springer.com )
identiﬁed by doi:10.1007/978-3-030-98581-3_1xes workshop insights 3
survey design. the survey instrument was developed by the xes wg through several
review iterations. the survey contained 12questions and captured the participants’ insights
on the suggestions for speeding up the data pre-processing, particularly to understand what
enhancement can be made to an industry-wide process mining data standard such as xes.
1. how much experience do you have with process mining?
2. which area and role best describe how you have interacted with pm?
3. what share of effort is typically spent on data pre-processing?
4. which process mining solutions have you used?
5. which technologies have you used in data pre-processing for process mining?
6. in which format(s) is your source data available in?
7. which source systems have you analysed with process mining?
8. how big was the largest data set you worked with in process mining?
9.to what extent did you encounter the following data-related challenges while undertaking
pm projects in terms of sourcing data, processing data, analysing process data?
10.which data-related challenges have you encountered beyond the ones listed in question 9?
11.there is general consensus amongst practitioners that data pre-processing tasks still
consume most of the effort put into process mining initiatives. how could we speed up
the data pre-processing to focus on analysis?
12.how could a re-imagined industry-wide process mining data standard help you excel in
your role?
the xes online survey was distributed to the international process mining community
(through linkedin posts, email lists and website announcements) and was opened from june
to july 2021. in total, 290responses were received. a duplicate response was detected and
removed, thus the total number of responses used for the analysis is 289.
survey insights. the responses for questions 1 to 9 were quantitatively analysed using
the descriptive and frequency analysis. in addition, the responses are grouped based on a
participant’s role. free-text responses provided in questions 10, 11, and 12 were analysed
by a research assistant to identify the emerging themes and then reviewed by two xes wg
members. this led to the final grouping of common themes presented later in the section.
out of the 289responses, the highest response rate is from the professional service role
(n=112 ,39 %), followed by academia ( n=97,33 %), software vendors ( n=46,16 %), and
commercial end users ( n=34,12 %), as depicted in fig. 1. the highest range of experience
reported was 2-5 years ( 38 %), followed by 5-10 years ( 24 %), 1-2 years ( 18 %), 10+ years
(10 %), and less than one year ( 9 %). participants with no experience are less than 1 %.
next, we present individual key findings for questions 3–12.
q3: what share of effort is typically spent on data pre-processing? figure 2 shows that
61 % to80 % of the effort of share for data pre-processing is the highest reported response by
participants ( 36 %) across all roles. the maximum percentage reported was 90 % for the aca-
demic role and the professional service role. these results confirm that a significant amount
of effort is being spent to pre-process event data for process mining. it is also interesting to
notice that most of the participants with less than one year of experience did not respond to
this question. this may indicate that process mining novices are more focused on the novel
techniques and tool development than on the input data.
pre-print copy of the manuscript published by springer (available at link.springer.com )
identiﬁed by doi:10.1007/978-3-030-98581-3_14 wynn et al.
fig. 1. xes survey participants: demographics
fig. 2. q3: share of effort on data pre-processing
q4: which process mining solutions have you used? celonis is the overall highest se-
lection ( n= 170 ), with disco ( n= 159 ) and prom ( n= 127 ) rounding off the top three
process mining solutions reported by the participants (see fig. 3). note that it is possible for
participants to select multiple solutions, and many opted for this. the role-wise comparison
for the top ten process mining solutions, where variations can be observed among the four
roles. for example, disco (fluxicon) is the most selected option for academics ( n= 77),
closely followed by prom ( n=65).
q5: which technologies have you used in data pre-processing for process mining? mi-
crosoft sql server is the highest selected response for database management and data storage
systems ( n=125 ). figure 4 shows a slightly different perspective among the four roles, with
academia selecting mysql ( n=45) ahead of microsoft sql server and the software vendors
preferring postgressql ( n=26). powerbi ( n=122 ) has been the most selected response as
a data visualisation tool (see fig. 5). python ( n=177 ) turned out to be the most used custom
data transformation language (see fig. 6).
q6: in which formats is your source data available in? a plain text file (e.g., txt or
csv) is the most commonly available source data format ( n=229 ), with the relational format
pre-print copy of the manuscript published by springer (available at link.springer.com )
identiﬁed by doi:10.1007/978-3-030-98581-3_1xes workshop insights 5
fig. 3. q4: 10 most used process mining solutions
fig. 4. q5: 10 most used database management and data storage systems (role-wise)
access ( n=168 ), and the xml format such as xes ( n=112 ) being selected as the second
and the third most common ones (see fig. 7). please notice that participants could select more
than one source data format. the responses also confirm that xml (e.g., xes) is not widely
used in the community with only 39 % (n=112 ) selecting this option.
the frequencies and their relative order among the top five source formats are also
different across the different roles (as shown in fig. 8). for example, xml is the second,
third, fourth, and third choice for academia, professional services, software vendors, and
commercial end users, respectively.
pre-print copy of the manuscript published by springer (available at link.springer.com )
identiﬁed by doi:10.1007/978-3-030-98581-3_16 wynn et al.
fig. 5. q5: 10 most used data visualisation technologies (role-wise)
fig. 6. q5: 10 most adopted custom data transformation languages (role-wise)
q7: which source systems have you analysed with process mining? sap ecc (r/3)
(n=114 ), sap s/4 hana ( n=101 ), and salesforce ( n=71) are the top three most analysed
source systems (see fig. 9). interestingly, 35 % of academics (34 out of 97) selected “i don’t
know” as their response for this question. this is probably due to the fact that they primarily
work with publicly available data sets such as those provided by the bpi challenges.
q8: how big was the largest data set you worked with in process mining? around 16 %
of participants ( n=45) have mentioned that they have worked with less than 1000 events and
0:05 % participants have mentioned that they have worked with more than 1;000;000;000(1
billion) events. moreover, around 20 % of the participants ( n=58) have worked with less than
1000 process cases or instances and around 4 %of the participants ( n=12) mentioned that the
highest number of process cases or instances they have worked with is larger than 1billion.
pre-print copy of the manuscript published by springer (available at link.springer.com )
identiﬁed by doi:10.1007/978-3-030-98581-3_1xes workshop insights 7
fig. 7. q6: 10 most used source data formats
fig. 8. q6: 10 most used source data formats (role-wise)
q9: to what extent did you encounter data-related challenges while undertaking pm
projects in terms of sourcing data, processing data, and analysing process data? fig-
ure 10 depicts an overview of sixteen data-related challenges identified across three categories:
sourcing data, process data, and analysing data. the participants were asked to select a single
option, ranging from none to very significant, for each data challenge.
among the six challenges linked to the sourcing of process data, the challenge of complex
data structures stands out as the most problematic, with 64 % of the participants ( n= 185 )
selecting either significant or very significant. moreover, 54 % of them selected the undoc-
umented data structures as a key challenge (significant or very significant). on the other hand,
61 % indicated that the challenge of identifying the required data in the source systems as
either moderate, minor or none, while 49 % felt the same about the challenge of exporting
data from source systems.
pre-print copy of the manuscript published by springer (available at link.springer.com )
identiﬁed by doi:10.1007/978-3-030-98581-3_18 wynn et al.
fig. 9. q7: 10 most used source systems
among the five processing data-related challenges, 45 % (n=140 ) identified inconsistent
data as being a relevant challenge (significant or very significant) while 42 % identified
incomplete data as being a significant challenge. however, 75 % of all participants ( n=217 )
indicated that the performance issues are not very significant by selecting either moderate,
minor or none for that challenge.
among the six data-related challenges linked to the analysis, the limitation related to
analysing one-to-many and many-to-many relationships has been identified as a crucial
challenge ( 48 % selecting either significant or very significant) while 76 % indicated that
exporting data from a process mining tool is the least significant challenge by selecting either
moderate, minor, or none.
q10: which data-related challenges have you encountered beyond the ones listed in
question 9? figure 11 shows the frequency of the new challenges proposed by the partic-
ipants. among them, lack of documentation and data quality feature as the two top themes.
q11: how could we speed up the data pre-processing to focus on analysis? the main
themes identified from the responses ( n=199 ) relate to the standardisation of data formats
as well as data transformation pipelines, suggestions for better tool support, scaling up of
domain and process mining expertise, and suggestions to improve data quality. figure 12
captures the main themes with exemplar comments received from the participants.
q12: how could a re-imagined industry-wide process mining data standard help you
excel in your role? the participants foresaw a variety of potential benefits ranging from the
acceleration of data pre-processing to commodisation of analysis ( n=156 ) (see fig. 13).
discussion. the survey results reconfirm the common belief that the data pre-processing task
is highly time consuming (with the maximum amount of effort estimated to be 90 %) while
36 % estimated their efforts to be within the range of 60 % to80 % (cf. q3). the responses
also confirm that the xml format (i.e., the one of xes) is not widely used in the community
pre-print copy of the manuscript published by springer (available at link.springer.com )
identiﬁed by doi:10.1007/978-3-030-98581-3_1xes workshop insights 9
fig. 10. q9: ranking the significance of data-related challenges
pre-print copy of the manuscript published by springer (available at link.springer.com )
identiﬁed by doi:10.1007/978-3-030-98581-3_110 wynn et al.
fig. 11. q10: qualitative insights of other data-related challenges
fig. 12. q11: qualitative insights for suggestions to speed up the data pre-processing
to store event logs, with only 39 % selecting this option (cf. q6). there seems to be consensus
among the process mining community that there are significant data-related challenges asso-
ciated with complex data structures, complex one-to-many and many-to-many relationships,
inconsistent data, incomplete data and missing relationships (cf. q9). these data challenges
should be carefully considered and addressed when a new standard is being prepared.
the participants also indicated a need for systematic and automated data pre-processing
techniques for efficient and reproducible data transformations for process mining. a dedicated
methodology for data pre-processing to support a structured approach to pm methodology
(stage 0 ) seems definitely desirable, with the ability to create templates that capture best
practices to ultimately speed up the data pre-processing task (cf. q11). approaches to assess
and improve the data quality issues identified in the survey (e.g., inconsistent data or incom-
pre-print copy of the manuscript published by springer (available at link.springer.com )
identiﬁed by doi:10.1007/978-3-030-98581-3_1xes workshop insights 11
fig. 13. q12: qualitative insights for the expected benefits of an industry-wide standard
plete data) could be beneficial. furthermore, a new event log standard should leave room for
various mechanisms to import/export the event data, not only using xml.
4 adding context: reflections from the xes 2.0 workshop
in order to challenge and validate the survey’s takeaways presented above, the xes wg
hosted a workshop co-located with the third int. conference on process mining in eindhoven
(netherlands) on november 2, 2021. a session on survey results set the scene, followed
by contributions from software vendors (represented by celonis and signavio), academia
(represented by rwth aachen and the free university of bozen-bolzano) and professional
services (represented by kpmg). concluding with a panel discussion centred around select
findings from the survey, the workshop not only offered well-balanced viewpoints from
different players in the discipline, but most notably revealed an unexpected homogeneity
concerning the most relevant levers for a successful evolution of the xes standard.
first, rethink the core concepts of an event log. numerous participants raised questions
about the fundamental scope of what information is captured in event logs. the support
of extensions render the current xes standard extremely flexible – even towards future,
non-anticipated requirements – but at the cost of complexity. with limited awareness and use
of existing extensions, this split needs to be revisited. it also became apparent that even though
xes itself does not stipulate any storage format, most participants equate xes with its xml
schema definition and call out its misfit with data volume and velocity of current, practical
use cases. this showcases the need to strictly focus on storage-agnostic core concepts first
and to later create multiple relevant reference implementations.
in addition, recent trends in industry and academia (e.g., object-centric event logs like
ocel, multi-event logs, and knowledge graphs) point to the need for complex data structures
and relationships to be captured in an event log. a consensus has been reached to revisit the
pre-print copy of the manuscript published by springer (available at link.springer.com )
identiﬁed by doi:10.1007/978-3-030-98581-3_112 wynn et al.
core concepts in an event log and propose a conceptual data model alongside a metadata
schema that can support complex data structures (including many-to-many relationships
between multiple objects, cases, and events).
event logs as a semantic layer. the current standard focuses mainly on syntactic interop-
erability and, to a lesser extent, on semantic aspects. however, enriching event logs with
semantics would open up a whole array of possibilities across academia and industry (e.g.,
novel algorithms, autonomous data transformation, dynamic perspective change, real-time
data extraction). additionally, domain-specificity could tailor the semantics extensions to
selective industries and thereby mimic real-world domain ontologies.
taking this concept one step further, domain ontologies linked with event data could
support process analytics without case identifiers. different event logs could be generated
as views over the same event data store. this intermediate layer would also hide the ultimate
sources of the event data (let them be single or multiple, homogeneous or heterogeneous,
legacy or newly implemented).
generating momentum amongst industry players. contributions, q&a and panel dis-
cussion also evidenced an intrinsic challenge of generating momentum around an industry
standard for interoperability. it is acknowledged that the current xes standard is hardly used
in industry or professional services. v endors see themselves in a balancing act with true
interoperability on the one side, arguably a catalyst for the whole industry, and proprietary
solutions on the other side, often attributed with preventing customer churn. in the end, the
community needs to find ways to present all sides with compelling cases to not only support,
but jointly design the next evolution of xes. not only vendors of process analytics tools
should be involved, but also those implementing systems for process execution. their support
could become the linchpin to propel the industry.
5 conclusion
this paper presents a summary of findings from an online survey with 289participants, who
span across the roles of practitioners, researchers, software vendors and end-users. it also
provides a synthesis of the discussion among the participants during the xes workshop at the
international conference on process mining 2021 and sketches the next steps for the xes wg.
acknowledgements. the authors would like to thank all survey respondents who contributed
their ideas presented in this paper. we would also like to thank the following presenters
and panelists who participated during the xes workshop: marco montali, philipp hoch,
elham ramezani, bj ¨orn wagner, sven wagner-boysen, constantin wehmschulte, and se-
bastiaan van zelst. the presentation slides are available at www.tf-pm.org/resources/
xes-standard/xes-2-0-workshop .
references
1. van der aalst, w.m.p .: process mining - data science in action, second edition. springer (2016)
2.ieee 1849 (xes) wg: ieee standard for extensible event stream (xes) for achieving
interoperability in event logs and event streams. ieee std 1849-2016 (nov 2016) 1–50
pre-print copy of the manuscript published by springer (available at link.springer.com )
identiﬁed by doi:10.1007/978-3-030-98581-3_1this document is a pre-print copy of the manuscript
(wynn et al. 2022)
published by springer (available at link.springer.com ).
the ﬁnal version of the paper is identiﬁed by doi:10.1007/978-3-030-98581-3_1
references
wynn, moe thandar, julian lebherz, wil m.p. van der aalst, rafael accorsi, claudio di ciccio,
lakmali jayarathna, and h.m.w. verbeek (2022). “rethinking the input for process mining:
insights from the xes survey and workshop”. in: process mining workshops . ed. by xixi lu and
jorge munoz-gama. lecture notes in business information processing. springer, pp. 3–16. isbn:
978-3-030-98581-3. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-98581-3_1 .
bibtex
@inproceedings{ wynn.etal/icpmw2021:xessurveyandworkshop,
author = {wynn, moe thandar and lebherz, julian and van der aalst,
wil m.p. and accorsi, rafael and di ciccio, claudio and
jayarathna, lakmali and verbeek, h.m.w.},
title = {rethinking the input for process mining: insights from the
xes survey and workshop},
booktitle = {process mining workshops},
year = {2022},
pages = {3--16},
crossref = {icpm2021workshops},
doi = {10.1007/978-3-030-98581-3_1},
keywords = {process mining; xes; event data; data transformation}
}
@proceedings{ icpm2021workshops,
title = {process mining workshops - {icpm} 2021 international
workshops, eindhoven, the netherlands, october 31-november
4, 2021, revised selected papers},
year = {2022},
editor = {xixi lu and jorge munoz-gama},
series = {lecture notes in business information processing},
publisher = {springer},
isbn = {978-3-030-98581-3}
}
view publication stats