six levels of autonomous process 
execution  management (apem) 
 
wil van der aalst , lehrstuhl für informatik 9 / process and data science, rwth aachen univ ersity,  
d-52056 aachen, germany,  www.vdaal st.com . 
 
terms such as the digital twin of an organization (dto) and hyperautomation (ha) illustrate 
the desire  to autonomously manage and orchestrate processes , just like we aim for 
autonomously driving cars. autonomous driving and autonomous process execution 
management (apem) have in common that the goals are pretty stra ightforward  and that each 
year progress is made, but fully autonomous driving and fully autonomous process execution  
are more a dream than a reality. for cars, the society of automotive engineers  (sae) identified 
six levels (0 -5), ranging from no driving automation (sae, level 0) to full driving automation 
(sae, level 5)  [1]. this short article  define s six levels of autonomous process execution 
management (apem) . the goal is to show that the transition  from one level to the next  will 
be gradual, just like for self -driving cars.  
 
relating autonomous driving and autonomous process execution management  
the first experiments with self -driving cars were already conducted in the 1930 -ties. 
futurama, a prototype installation sponsored by g eneral motors, was presented at the 1939 
new york world's fair. futurama represented a futuristic view o f the future of transport using 
radio -controlled electric cars propelled via electromagnetic fields provided by circuits 
embedded in the roads. over tim e, technology d eveloped at a breathtaking  pace, but fully 
autonomous driving is still a dream and not a reality.  
mercedes -benz was the world's first automaker to gain international approval to produce a 
car that is capable of level 3 autonom ous driving in 2022  [3,4]. in 2021,  honda  produced a 
limited set of cars allowed to drive at level 3 in japan. however, the usage is limited . e.g., the  
mercedes s -class with drive pilot can only be used at daytime, on highways, and at speeds 
below 60 kilometers per hour . it is still not allowed to take  a nap while driving , and it seems 
that real self -driving cars are far from reality . the same applies to autonomous process 
execution. since gartner introduced terms such as the digital twin of an organization (dto) and hyperautomation (ha) , people have started to think about the use of machine learning 
(ml) and artificial intelligence (ai) beyond the automation of individual tasks . moreover, 
process mining emerged as a new ingredient supporting  such a development. however, 
buzzwords like dto and ha are even more confusing than the six level s defined by the society 
of automotive engineers (sae)  [2]. therefore, we start by providing a few existing definitions.  towards a digital twin of an organization  
gartner uses the followin g definition  for a dto : "a digital twin of an organization (dto) is a 
dynamic software model of any organization that relies on operational and/or other data to 
understand how an organization operationalizes its business model, connects with its current state, responds to changes, deploys resources and deli vers exceptional customer value " [5]. 
this can be seen as one of the grand challenges in information systems, just like autonomous 
driving in mobility.  gartner also introduced the related term "hyperautom ation" which aims 
at creating a common set of concepts and technologies to orchestrate all islands of 
automation, new and existing and at all levels, within an organization  [6]. at the same time , 
we see the uptake of low- code automation frameworks, robotic  process automation (rpa) , 
and task automation ( ta). these novel automation approaches aim to replace human 
workers by software  in a cost -effective manner  [8,10].  as a side -effect , processes can be 
improved, but the main focus is on automation. there is of ten a vague reference to ai and 
ml, but the connection is  other  rather weak , and solutions are often static and programmed 
or configured by humans.  
as defined in the book "process mining: data science in action" [9] , process mining is 
designed to discover,  monitor,  and improve real processes (not assumed processes) by 
extracting knowledge from event logs readily available in today's information systems. process mining includes automated process discovery (i.e., extracting process models from an event log), conformance checking (i.e., monitoring deviations by comparing model and 
log), social network/organizational mining, automated construction of simulation models, 
model extension, model repair, case prediction, and history -based recommendations.  in 
recent y ears, the scope of process mining was extended to also include ml, ai, and 
automation, e.g., action -oriented and predictive process mining.  process mining is clearly one 
of the building blocks towards apem.  
process execution management (pem) is close to tr aditional business process management 
(bpm). both pem and bpm do  not focus on the execution of individual tasks, but on  the 
orchestration and management of processes. however, unlike a classical bpm system, a process execution management system (pems)  does  not assume explicitly programmed 
workflows  and is more data -driven . the pems  is often implemented as a layer on top of 
existing software systems and people . the celonis ems can be seen as a pems  [7]. moreover, 
several other vendors are combining process mining with automation to realize a pems.   
six levels of autonomous process execution management  
just like autonomous driving, autonomous pem is not easy to define. however, it is clear that there are different levels. the table on the next page  compares the six sae levels for 
autonomous driving [1] with six possible levels of autonomous pem.  
   
 sae levels for autonomous driving  levels of autonomous process execution 
management  
level 0  a human is driving, and features are 
limited to breaking assistance, blind -
spot warning, lane departure 
warning , etc.  there is no pems. all orchestration and 
management are done by humans . features 
are limited to dashboards, reporting, key 
performance indicators, hard -coded 
workflows, and manually created simulations 
to conduct what -if analysis.  
level 1  a human  is driving , but the car 
provides steering or brake/  
acceleration support, e.g. , lane  
centering or adaptive cruise control.  the pems is able  to detect and quantify 
known and unknown performance and 
compliance problems.  features include 
process discovery and conforman ce checking. 
the pems may create alerts. however, 
humans  need to interpr et the diagnostics 
and, if needed,  select appropriate  actions.  
level 2  a human  is driving , but the car 
provides st eering and brake/  
acceleration support. the difference 
with level 1 is the combination of 
systems.  the pems is able to detect and quantify 
known and unknown performance and 
compliance problems. moreover, the pems is able to  
recommend actions in case of 
detected known  performance and  
compliance problems  (execution gaps)  and 
support the user in triggering corresponding 
actions. these actions may be automated, 
but in-the-end a human decides.  
level 3  under selected circumstances , the 
car is driving. however, t he driver 
needs to be alert and ready to take over control at any time.  the pems automatically responds to 
performance and compliance problems by 
taking appropriate actions. however, this is limited to a subset of problems and humans need to be alert and r
eady to take over 
control.  
level 4  under selected circumstances , the 
car is driving. if the conditions are not met, the vehicle  
stops. the driver 
does not need to constantly monitor the situation.  the pems automatically responds to 
performance and complia nce problems by 
taking appropriate actions. in principle, all 
management and orchestration decisions are made by the pems . humans do not need to 
constantly monitor the pems, but the system 
may decide to call o n the help of human s in 
case of diverging or un expected behaviors.  
level 5  the car can drive itself under all 
circumstances (comparable to a 
human driver).  the pems functions fully autonomous also 
under diverging or unexpected 
circumstances.  
  
the six possible levels of autonomous pem should be seen  as an initial proposal. it is 
important to understand that the scope is limited to the orchestration and management of 
operational processes. classical workflow and bpm systems operate at level 0. as of level 3, the pems automatically selects actions base d on the current and historic al data.  
  hybrid intelligence  
as mentioned before, the mercedes s -class can operate at level 3, but this is limited to 
highways during daytime and for speeds below 60 kilometers per hour. just like there are 
different types o f roads  and traffic conditions , there are different types of processes  operating 
under different circumstances . standard  processes such as order -to-cash (o2c) and 
purchase -to-pay (p2p) are very different from  the production of chips or the treatment of 
covid patients. moreover, process es may be in steady -state or experience exceptional loads. 
therefore, most levels require an interplay between humans and the pems. this matches well with the hybrid intelligence  concept , which tries to combine human and machine intelligence. 
the strengths of human intelligence  are characterized by the words flexible, creative, 
emphatic, instinctive, and commonsensical. the strengths of machine intelligence  are 
characterized by the words fast, efficient, cheap, scalable, and co nsistent. hence, hybrid 
intelligence will be one of the recurring themes in the context of apem . 
as niels bohr once said , "it is difficult to make predictions, especially about the future" and 
this applies to both autonomous driving and apem . in 2015, elon musk stated that: "the tesla 
that is currently in production has the ability to do automatic steering autopilot on the highway. that is currently being beta tested and will go into a wide release early next month. so, we are probably only a month away from having autonomous driving at least for highways 
and for relatively simple roads. my guess for when we will have full autonomy is 
approximately three years." this was clearly too optimistic. the same applies to the claims of 
software vendor s when it comes to ai and ml. however, the direction is clear. the importance 
of pem will increase , and pem systems will become more autonomous over time. however, 
this will be a slow and gradual process starting with simple processes such as o2c and p2p 
under "perfect weather conditions ".  
 
references  
[1] taxonomy and definitions for terms related to driving automation systems for on-road motor vehicles (j3016_202104), society of automotive engineers (sae), april 2021.  
[2] society of automotive engineers (sae) we bsite, www.sae.org
.  
[3] we really need to talk about mode confusion, colin barnden, ee times, april 2022, https://www.eetimes.com/we -really -need -to-talk-about -mode -confusion/
.  
[4] this new mercedes self -driving system lets you take your eyes off the road, dan 
carney, popular science, march 2022, https://www.popsci.com/technology/drive -
pilot -mercedes -benz -test-ride/ .  
[5] create a digital twin of your organization to optimize your digital transformation program, marc kerremans and joanne kopcho, gartner report g00379226, february 
2019.  
[6] driving efficien cy and reliability with hyperautomation, rich mcavey and simon 
cushing, gartner report g00757838, january 2022.  [7] celonis execution management system (ems) website, 
https://www.celonis.com/ems/platform/.  
[8] process mining and rpa, wil van der aalst, robotic pro cess automation: 
management, technology, applications, pages 223 -242. de gruyter stem, 2021.  
[9] process mining: data science in action, wil van der aalst,  springer- verlag, berlin, 
2016.  
[10] robotic process automation, wil van der aalst, martin bichler, and armin  heinzl, 
business & information systems engineering, volume 60, pages  269–272, 2018.  
 
 
 