see discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/358216054
process mining for healthcare: characteristics and challenges
article    in  journal of biomedic al inf ormatics  · januar y 2022
doi: 10.1016/ j.jbi.2022.103994
citations
27reads
923
55 author s, including:
some o f the author s of this public ation ar e also w orking on these r elat ed pr ojects:
object -centric pr ocess mining  view pr oject
smart t extiles f or a sust ainable work lif e view pr oject
niels martin
hasselt univ ersity
49 publica tions    525 citations    
see profile
carlos f ernande z-llat as
univ ersitat p olitècnic a de v alència
134 publica tions    1,545  citations    
see profile
mar cos sepulv eda
pontificia univ ersidad cat ólica de chile
97 publica tions    2,564  citations    
see profile
all c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y antonio martine z-millana  on 09 f ebruar y 2022.
the user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.journal of biomedical informatics 127 (2022) 103994
available online 29 january 2022
1532-0464/© 2022 the authors. published by elsevier inc. this is an open access article under the cc by license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).original research 
process mining for healthcare: characteristics and challenges 
jorge munoz-gamaa,*, niels martinb,c,*, carlos fernandez-llatasd,g,*, owen a. johnsone,*, 
marcos sepúlvedaa,*, emmanuel helmf,*, victor galvez-yanjaria,*, eric rojasa, 
antonio martinez-millanad, davide aloinik, ilaria angela amanteal,q,r, robert andrewsab, 
michael ariasz, iris beerepooto, elisabetta beneventok, andrea burattinai, daniel capurroj, 
josep carmonas, marco comuzziw, benjamin dalmasaj,ak, rene de la fuentea, 
chiara di francescomarinoh, claudio di ciccioi, roberto gattaad,ae, chiara ghidinih, 
fernanda gonzalez-lopeza, gema ibanez-sanchezd, hilda b. klaskyp, 
angelina prima kurniatial, xixi luo, felix mannhardtm, ronny mansaf, mar marcosv, 
renata medeiros de carvalhom, marco pegorarox, simon k. poonag, luise pufahlu, 
hajo a. reijersm,o, simon remyy, stefanie rinderle-maah, lucia sacchit, 
fernando seoaneg,am,an, minseok songaa, alessandro stefaninik, emilio sulisl, arthur h. 
m. ter hofstedeab, pieter j. toussaintac, vicente traverd, zoe valero-ramond, 
inge van de weerdo, wil m.p. van der aalstx, rob vanwerschm, mathias weskey, 
moe thandar wynnab, francesca zerbaton 
apontificia universidad cat˘olica de chile, chile 
bhasselt university, belgium 
cresearch foundation flanders (fwo), belgium 
duniversitat politˇecnica de valˇencia, spain 
euniversity of leeds, united kingdom 
funiversity of applied sciences upper austria, austria 
gkarolinska institutet, sweden 
hfondazione bruno kessler, italy 
isapienza university of rome, italy 
juniversity of melbourne, australia 
kuniversity of pisa, italy 
luniversity of turin, italy 
meindhoven university of technology, the netherlands 
nuniversity of st. gallen, switzerland 
outrecht university, the netherlands 
poak ridge national laboratory, united states 
quniversity of bologna, italy 
runiversity of luxembourg, luxembourg 
suniversitat politˇecnica de catalunya, spain 
tuniversity of pavia, italy 
utechnische universitaet berlin, germany 
vuniversitat jaume i, spain 
wulsan national institute of science and technology (unist), republic of korea 
xrwth aachen university, germany 
yuniversity of potsdam, germany 
zuniversidad de costa rica, costa rica 
aapohang university of science and technology, republic of korea 
abqueensland university of technology, australia 
acnorwegian university of science and technology, norway 
aduniversit ˘a degli studi di brescia, italy 
*corresponding authors at: hasselt university, belgium (n. martin), karolinska institutet, sweden (c. fernandez-llatas), pontificia universidad cat˘olica de chile 
(j. munoz-gama, m. sepúlveda, v. galvez-yanjari), research foundation flanders (fwo), belgium (n. martin), universitat polit ˇecnica de valˇencia, spain (c. 
fernandez-llatas), university of applied sciences upper austria, austria (e. helm) and university of leeds (o. johnson). 
contents lists available at sciencedirect 
journal of biomedical informatics 
u{�~zkw! s{yo| kro>! ððð1ow �o�to~1m{y2w{m k�o2þultz!
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2022.103994 
received 1 september 2021; received in revised form 16 november 2021; accepted 10 january 2022   journal of biomedical informatics 127 (2022) 103994
2aelausanne university hospital (chuv), switzerland 
afphilips research, the netherlands 
agthe university of sydney, australia 
ahtechnical university of munich, germany 
aitechnical university of denmark, denmark 
ajmines saint-etienne, france 
akuniversit ˘e clermont auvergne, france 
altelkom university, indonesia 
amkarolinska university hospital, sweden 
anuniversity of borås, sweden   
article info  
keywords: 
process mining 
healthcare abstract  
process mining techniques can be used to analyse business processes using the data logged during their execu -
tion. these techniques are leveraged in a wide range of domains, including healthcare, where it focuses mainly 
on the analysis of diagnostic, treatment, and organisational processes. despite the huge amount of data generated 
in hospitals by staff and machinery involved in healthcare processes, there is no evidence of a systematic uptake 
of process mining beyond targeted case studies in a research context. when developing and using process mining 
in healthcare, distinguishing characteristics of healthcare processes such as their variability and patient-centred 
focus require targeted attention. against this background, the process-oriented data science in healthcare 
alliance has been established to propagate the research and application of techniques targeting the data-driven 
improvement of healthcare processes. this paper, an initiative of the alliance, presents the distinguishing 
characteristics of the healthcare domain that need to be considered to successfully use process mining, as well as 
open challenges that need to be addressed by the community in the future.   
1.introduction 
innovations make healthcare better, affordable and efficient. de-
velopments such as new technologies and business models help to move 
healthcare forward [1]. in addition, healthcare systems are confronted 
across the world with unprecedented challenges, including the perma -
nent and rapid adaptation of clinical processes based on the emerging 
scientific evidence [2] and the provision of high-quality care with 
limited resources [3–5]. within this context, healthcare organisations, 
such as hospitals, are aware of the need to manage and improve both 
their clinical processes (e.g., care pathways describing the treatment of a 
particular medical condition over the time) and their organisational/ 
administrative processes (e.g., billing processes) [6,7] . 
process execution data are a valuable information source to support 
the management and improvement of healthcare processes. typically, 
healthcare organisations make intensive use of health information 
systems (hiss), such as a hospital information system. during the 
execution of a process, several entries in the hiss are recorded (e.g., 
when a patient was registered or was subject to a clinical examination by 
a physician). the entries in the databases of these hiss can be leveraged 
to generate an event log describing the sequence of activities that were 
performed, when they were executed, by whom and for whom (e.g., for 
which specific patient) [8]. as the event log reflects how a process has 
been executed in reality, it can support clinicians, healthcare organisa -
tion’s managers, and other decision-makers with a wide range of 
process-related questions in the medical domain. 
to answer process-related questions, process mining techniques can 
be of great value. process mining is a set of techniques used in many 
domains, including healthcare, to retrieve valuable insights from an 
event log [7–9]. a multitude of process mining techniques have been 
developed in industry and academia [8,10] , which enable healthcare 
stakeholders to identify the actual order of activities in a process [11], to 
determine the conformance between an existing (e.g., normative) model 
and reality [12], and to provide insights into the involvement of re-
sources in a process [8,13] . 
compared to alternative approaches, such as process mapping ex-
ercises with staff members [14], process mining takes data about the 
real-life behaviour of a process as a starting point. in this way, process 
mining can support healthcare institutions in achieving each of the 
quadruple aim for healthcare improvement [15]: (i) improving population health, e.g., by supporting the analysis and improvement of 
care pathways; (ii) improving patient experience, e.g., by highlighting 
how a process can be streamlined from the patient ’s perspective; (iii) 
reducing costs, e.g., by making bottlenecks explicit; and (iv) improving 
the work-life balance of healthcare professionals, e.g., by enabling the 
analysis of resource involvement and requirements in a healthcare 
process [15,16] . besides supporting the data-driven management and 
improvement of healthcare processes, process mining also has the po-
tential to support the resilience of the healthcare system by providing 
detailed insights into how processes are being executed within a 
particular context [2]. 
despite the vast potential of process mining [17], the distinguishing 
characteristics of the healthcare domain require targeted attention when 
developing and using process mining techniques. for instance: health -
care processes are typically characterised by high levels of variation 
[18], and strongly depend on complex decisions made by knowledge 
workers, such as physicians, which often have a high degree of auton -
omy [19,20] . to date, there is no evidence of a systematic uptake of 
process mining beyond targeted case studies in a research context [7]. 
to induce a widespread and systematic adoption of process mining in 
the healthcare domain, targeted methods and techniques that explicitly 
take the specific domain characteristics into account are required. 
our paper aims to convey a unified perspective on the distinguishing 
characteristics and associated key challenges of the process mining for 
healthcare (pm4h) domain. the distinguishing characteristics add to the 
complexity of using process mining within a healthcare context. the 
associated challenges need to be tackled by the community, including 
researchers and practitioners, in order to structurally establish process 
mining in healthcare as a powerful instrument to support evidence- 
based process analysis and improvement. tackling the highlighted 
challenges requires efforts at the level of fundamental research and 
translational research. in that sense, this paper may inspire and 
encourage researchers to contribute to this exciting field. 
this paper is an initiative of the process-oriented data science for 
healthcare alliance1, which is affiliated with the ieee task force on 
process mining2. the alliance aims to promote research and knowledge 
1 https://www.pods4h.com/alliance  
2 https://www.tf-pm.org j. munoz-gama et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          journal of biomedical informatics 127 (2022) 103994
3sharing to encourage targeted innovation in process mining in health -
care, as well as its effective application in real-life settings. with this 
paper, the alliance expresses its firm ambition to strengthen the do-
main ’s identity by making both its distinguishing characteristics and key 
challenges explicit. the distinguishing characteristics and challenges 
have emerged from extensive consultation with a wide range of experts 
on the topic, for instance during panel discussions at the pods4h 
workshop3 at the international conference on business process man-
agement and the international conference on process mining. 
the remainder of this paper is structured as follows. section 2 in-
troduces the basic concepts of process mining in healthcare. section 3 
outlines ten distinguishing characteristics which are especially relevant 
for process mining in healthcare, and section 4 presents ten associated 
challenges that have to be considered by the community. table 1 pre-
sents an overview of the distinguishing characteristics and challenges in 
the pm4h domain. finally, the paper ends with some concluding re-
marks in section 5. 
2.process mining in healthcare: basic concepts and 
applications 
this section introduces the key concepts of process mining (section 
2.1). moreover, some applications of process mining in healthcare are 
presented (section 2.2). 
2.1. process mining 
process mining is a family of techniques focused on gaining valuable 
insights from data that processes generate while being executed. it 
works as a bridge between process science (which includes areas such as 
business process management and operations research) and data science 
(which includes areas such as data mining and predictive analytics), 
resulting in methods to analyse processes through data [8]. process 
mining is domain-agnostic, i.e, process mining techniques can be 
applied in any industry where processes are present and data repre -
senting them is available. healthcare, the focus of this paper, is one 
domain where the use of process mining is growing [10,21] . 
fig. 1 positions process mining in healthcare in a wider context. 
process mining centres around processes, which can be represented 
using a process model such as a model representing the sequence of steps 
in a process and the different paths a process can take [22]. the order of 
activities in a process can be visualised in various ways, e.g., using 
flowcharts [23] or business process modeling notation (bpmn) [24]. 
fig. 2 exemplifies the use of bpmn to model the trajectory of sepsis 
patients. note that the model is purposefully simplified for illustrative 
purposes. 
nowadays, many healthcare processes are – at least partially – sup-
ported by health information systems (hiss). hiss that commonly 
support healthcare processes are electronic health records (ehr) sys-
tems provided by vendors such as epic4, cerner5, meditech6, all-
scripts7, athenahealth8, ibm9, mckesson10, and siemens11. such systems 
record data about the execution of processes in a healthcare organisation 
[8]. this process execution data can be leveraged to create an event log. 
event logs containing process execution data are the primary input 
for process mining algorithms [8]. an event log is composed of cases representing different process instances, e.g. the execution of a treat-
ment process for a specific patient. each case is composed of a sequence 
of events, where an event could refer to the completion of a particular 
activity in the treatment process. as illustrated in table 2, an event log 
typically records the following information for each event: (a) an iden-
tifier of each case (‘case id’), (b) the activities that each case included 
(‘activity ’), and (c) a reference to when each activity was executed 
(‘timestamp ’). besides this information, an event log can also contain 
information regarding the type of event (‘transaction type ’), the 
resource associated to an event (‘resource ’), as well as other attributes 
regarding the activity or case. consequently, the key components of an 
event log are:  
≡case id: a process instance contained in the data, which could be a 
patient being treated in the hospital in a clinical process or an invoice table 1 
distinguishing characteristics and challenges of process mining in healthcare.   
distinguishing characteristics  challenges 
d1: exhibit substantial variability c1: design dedicated/tailored 
methodologies and 
frameworks  
variability is the norm due to 
intrinsic differences in patients.  pm4h methodologies and 
frameworks are essential to 
provide answers to relevant 
healthcare questions. 
d2: value the infrequent 
behaviour c2: discover beyond discovery  
infrequent behaviour contains 
key information for healthcare 
process understanding.  conformance checking and 
enhancement types can 
provide new knowledge to the 
pm4h domain. 
d3: use guidelines and protocols c3: mind the concept drift  
plenty of protocols and 
guidelines are present in 
healthcare.  healthcare processes change 
over the time. 
d4: break the glass c4: deal with reality  
context-related issues and 
unpredictable situations shape 
healthcare processes.  if it does not work with real 
data, it does not work. 
d5: consider data at multiple 
abstraction levels c5: do it yourself (diy)  
high and low level data are 
registered while healthcare 
processes are executed.  developments to foster the use 
of process mining by 
healthcare professionals are 
required. 
d6: involve a multidisciplinary 
team c6: pay attention to data 
quality  
all the healthcare professionals 
implicated have key process 
knowledge.  addressing quality issues 
make results trustable. 
d7: focus on the patient c7: take care of privacy and 
security  
a patient-centred view is the 
core in healthcare processes.  methods to preserve patients ’ 
privacy and security when 
conducting pm4h analyses are 
needed. 
d8: think about white-box 
approaches c8: look at the process through 
the patient ’s eyes  
understandability is key when 
analysing healthcare processes.  new knowledge can emerge 
looking the process from the 
patient ’ perspective. 
d9: generate sensitive and low- 
quality data c9: complement hiss with the 
process perspective  
healthcare data are sensitive, 
which are either automatically 
or manually recorded.  how to incorporate the 
process perspective in the his 
is a challenge to be addressed. 
d10: handle rapid evolutions and 
new paradigms c10: evolve in symbiosis with the 
developments in the 
healthcare domain  
healthcare is constantly 
evolving due to advances in 
clinical knowledge, technology, 
and novel paradigms.  pm4h methods should 
provide ongoing support to the 
constantly changing 
healthcare domain.  
3 https://www.pods4h.com  
4 https://www.epic.com  
5 https://www.cerner.com  
6 https://ehr.meditech.com  
7 https://ca.allscripts.com  
8 https://www.athenahealth.com  
9 https://www.ibm.com/products/explorys-ehr-data-analysis-tools  
10 https://www.mckesson.com  
11 https://www.corporate.siemens-healthineers.com j. munoz-gama et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          journal of biomedical informatics 127 (2022) 103994
4in an organisational process. in table 2, each case represents a sepsis 
patient. cases can be recognized by their unique identifier, e.g. pa-
tient 253 and 255.  
≡activity : a step of the process, which could be ‘check vital signs ’ in a 
clinical process or ‘send payment reminder ’ in an organisational 
process. in table 2, the activities include ‘er registration ’, repre -
senting the action of registering the patient in the emergency ward, 
and ‘crp ’, representing the registration of c-reactive protein mea-
surement in the system.  
≡timestamp : time at which the event took place. in table 2, the first 
event took place on april 14th, 2021 at 11:33:50.  
≡transaction type: the state when the event was recorded. in table 2, 
all the events were recorded once they were completed (‘complete ’ 
state). other possible states are ‘start ’, ‘resume ’ or ‘schedule ’, among 
others.  
≡resource : refers to the resource associated to the event. this could 
refer, for instance, to a physician, a healthcare professional or 
medical device. in table 2, the resource information tells us, for 
example, that ‘nurse 1’ has registered the triage information of pa-
tient 253, while ‘physician 02’ recorded the admission of patient 253 
to the normal care ward.  
≡other attributes: additional case or event attributes may also be 
recorded in an event log, such as the hospital unit where the patient 
has received care, the patient ’s vital signs, etc. 
event log creation in healthcare environments faces considerable 
challenges due to heterogeneous data sources (e.g., mobile health data) 
and distributed healthcare providers [27]. moreover, it is recognised 
that some healthcare processes are not directly supported by hiss, i.e. 
unplugged processes [28]. these type of processes require novel methods 
to obtain an event log, such as the video tagging method to create 
process data from surgical procedure recordings [29]. medical vocabu -
laries and ontologies are also important assets that can be helpful when 
creating event logs in healthcare environments [27]. 
using the event log, various process mining types can be performed in order to generate valuable process-related insights. three prominent 
types of process mining are [8]:  
≡discovery: these algorithms are useful to obtain process models 
reflecting process behavior from an event log [8]. many algorithms 
focus on discovering the order of activities in the process (a.k.a. 
control-flow, trajectories, activity paths, and care pathways) from 
the data. besides the large number of control-flow discovery algo-
rithms, other discovery algorithms help to gain knowledge about 
how resources work throughout the process, focusing on role dis-
covery [30,31] , social networks [32,33] , and task prioritisation 
patterns [34]. examples of use cases include the discovery of models 
of gynecological oncology processes showing relations between the 
organisational units involved and therapeutics pathways that pa-
tients received [35,36] , or the discovery of collaboration patterns 
discovered between the physician, nurse and dietitian involved in 
diabetes treatment [37]. fig. 3 illustrates the discovered trajectories 
of sepsis patients in a hospital.  
≡conformance checking: these algorithms require a process model, 
either obtained by means of a discovery algorithm or previously 
designed, and aim to compare the behaviour in the event log with the 
behaviour in that process model [12,36] . hence, conformance 
checking algorithms help to evaluate whether the process is being 
executed as described in the process model, as well as to detect de-
viations between the observed behaviour in the event log and the 
process model. for instance: huang et al. [9] use conformance 
checking to detect deviations from the unstable angina pathway. the 
analysis highlighted the presence of unexpected, early, delayed and 
absent activities [9].  
≡enhancement: these algorithms help to enrich and extend an existing 
process model using process data [8]. an enhancement type is model 
repair, which allows the modification of a process model based on 
event logs [38]. another type is model extension, where information 
is added to enrich a process model with information such as time and 
roles. some examples are the repair of declarative process models 
representing clinical practice guidelines in an urology department 
[39], and the model extension of a process model with the duration 
of surgical procedure stages based on robot-assisted partial ne-
phrectomy (rapn) data [40]. 
to facilitate the application of process mining in practice, various 
software tools have been developed, including commercial software 
such as disco12, celonis13 and apromore14. there are also open-source 
alternatives, such as prom15, and libraries for programming languages, 
such as pm4py16 for python and bupar17 for r. 
2.2. applications of process mining in healthcare 
over the last years, process mining has been used for various use 
cases in healthcare, which has been demonstrated in various literature 
reviews on this topic [10,21,41] . while section 2.1 present various 
process mining examples, this subsection highlights some of the most 
relevant healthcare questions that process mining can answer. 
process variant exploration for clinical pathway analysis is a 
frequently recurring use case for pm4h [21]. these techniques study the 
difference between several variants of the execution of the same clinical 
pathway, which could be approached from a control-flow or perfor -
mance perspective [42]. clinical pathways are highly flexible as all 
fig. 1.positioning of process mining in healthcare, based on [8].  
12 https://www.fluxicon.com/disco  
13 https://www.celonis.com  
14 https://www.apromore.org  
15 https://www.promtools.org  
16 https://pm4py.org  
17 https://www.bupar.net j. munoz-gama et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          journal of biomedical informatics 127 (2022) 103994
5patients in need of the same treatment come with different co- 
morbidities and complications, involve complex decision-making due 
to its knowledge-intensive nature, are performed by a network of spe-
cialists, and continuously evolve due to innovations and unforeseen 
situations [43]. identifying differences between groups of pathway ex-
ecutions through process variant analysis helps to decide whether pro-
cess improvement is needed, and if so, which changes can make the 
process more efficient [44]. an example of this analysis is caron et al. 
[45], where data of 1143 gynecologic oncology patients were analysed 
in two subsets: one with patients receiving radiotherapy and the other 
with patients receiving chemotherapy. there are various challenges 
related to process variant analysis, including the comparison of process 
variants from the resource perspective, the verification of guideline 
compliance, the discovery of how adverse events are faced, the analysis 
of process variants across the whole patient journey (including pre-
vention, pre-hospital care, hospital treatment and rehabilitation), and 
the identification of useful variants for process improvement [42–46]. 
process mining also has applications for disease trajectory modeling, which refers to models characterising the progress of a disease over time 
and compare the disease evolution depending on patient attributes such 
as the age, co-morbidities and received treatments received of a patient 
[47,48] . an example is the study conducted by de oliveira et al. [49], 
where data of 76.523 sepsis patients was used to uncover the most 
common diagnostics that patients received prior and after the diagnosis 
to understand better how to identify and manage sepsis. using process 
mining, they developed a bow-tie visualisation, which allowed them to 
discover that pneumonia and gastrointestinal disorders commonly 
occurred before sepsis, while septicaemia, pneumonia and urinary tract 
infections occurred after sepsis. challenges in disease trajectory 
modeling using process mining are the development of models which are 
easy to understand (i.e. clear visualisations of the trajectories), and the 
comparison of these models with clinical guidelines using conformance 
checking [48]. 
the aforementioned use cases only aim to illustrate the opportunities 
that process mining offers to healthcare. there are various other highly 
relevant questions for which process mining can generate relevant 
fig. 2.process model representing the sepsis patients trajectory, based on mannhardt [25]. the model was created using bpmn as a process modelling language. the 
start event (○) indicates the start point of the process, and the end event (circle at the end of the model) indicates the end point of the process. the gateways represent 
alternative paths: the parallel gateway (
) means that all the paths should be followed, and the exclusive gateway (
) means that only one path .can be followed. j. munoz-gama et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          journal of biomedical informatics 127 (2022) 103994
6insights. these questions include: 
≡how does the process flow of patients with a particular medical compli -
cation differ from other patients? 
every patient is unique, which implies that patients with the same 
illness respond differently to the same treatment due to co- 
morbidities and other contextual factors [50]. variations in the pa-
tient trajectory can be discovered with process mining algorithms, 
which help to characterise groups of similar patients (in terms of 
medical history, laboratory tests, etc.), allowing healthcare pro-
fessionals to gain profound insights in the treatment trajectory of 
various patient types.  
≡to which extent is the care pathway for a particular medical condition 
followed in practice? 
with the rise of evidence-based medicine, protocols and clinical 
guidelines are developed to provide clarity in the necessary steps 
when diagnosing and treating a medical condition [51]. however, it 
is difficult to determine the implementation and effectiveness of 
clinical protocols and guidelines in reality, i.e. whether they are 
followed in practice. process mining allows practitioners and re-
searchers to perform this type of analysis, which can help to under -
stand major deviations from clinical guidelines, as well as to identify 
areas for improvement in clinical guidelines and protocols.  
≡where are the bottlenecks in a healthcare process? 
time is often an important variable in healthcare. process mining 
makes it possible to analyse the time perspective of processes 
through indicators such as waiting times and activity duration, 
which together help to detect bottlenecks in a process. having this 
information on healthcare processes, such as those in an emergency 
department, can drive decision-making to, for example, improve the 
availability of boxes and reduce waiting times [52].  
≡how do multiple clinical experts interact in a care process? 
collaboration between clinicians and other healthcare staff is daily 
practice in healthcare [53]. hence, when analysing a care process, 
various healthcare professionals are likely to be involved when 
treating a disease. process mining provides tools to analyse collab -
oration patterns among healthcare professionals within a process, e. 
g. by identifying handovers of work [54]. these questions illustrate that pm4h can support healthcare pro-
fessionals in answering a wide variety of process-related questions. 
against this background, the next section will outline distinguishing 
characteristics of healthcare processes. afterwards, key challenges for 
the pm4h community are discussed. 
3.distinguishing characteristics 
this section outlines ten distinguishing characteristics of healthcare 
processes, which have implications for pm4h. while we do not claim 
that these characteristics are exclusive to the healthcare domain, we 
consider them as highly relevant for the use of process mining in a 
healthcare context. the distinguishing characteristics are discussed 
separately in the remainder of this section, but, in practice, they are also 
interconnected, adding to the complexity required to take them into 
consideration. moreover, the distinguishing characteristics give rise to 
specific challenges, which need to be taken into account when devel -
oping process mining techniques. 
3.1. d1: exhibit substantial variability 
healthcare processes are complex, in part because they tend to 
exhibit significant variability [4,18,55] . several factors contribute to 
this intrinsic presence of variability in healthcare processes. these fac-
tors include the vast diversity of activities that can typically be executed, 
the fact that several subprocesses can be executed simultaneously (e.g., 
in case of polytrauma), and the influence of differences in the personal 
preferences/characteristics of patients, clinicians and other healthcare 
professionals (e.g., impacting choices made in the treatment process) 
[18,56] . the combination of such factors tends to make almost all cases 
(e.g., a patient in a clinical process) different. for instance: given the 
patient ’s pathologies and co-morbidities, a different set of activities 
might need to be executed in comparison with the standard pathway. 
moreover, patients can respond very differently to particular treatments, 
which affects the order or type of activities that follow. it should also not 
be forgotten that the patient is the ultimate decision maker, who may 
accept or decline a particular treatment according to beliefs, fears or 
perceptions regarding quality of life. 
when an event log of a highly variable healthcare process is used to 
discover a control-flow model, control-flow discovery algorithms are 
likely to generate an unstructured model, often referred to as a spaghetti 
model [8]. classic process mining techniques are not well prepared to 
deal with unstructured processes and, as a consequence, generate pro-
cess models which are extremely challenging to interpret. a common 
approach to deal with this issue is to remove or reduce the variability in 
the event log by means of abstraction techniques such as filtering or 
aggregation, e.g., using trace clustering techniques [57] and semantic 
aggregation of activities [58,59] . however, this approach generates 
process models that only cover a small part of the problem at hand. such 
approaches might not be sufficient for many real-world healthcare ap-
plications because they only provide a partial view of the process and 
may hide valuable infrequent behaviour. hence, pm4h researchers 
should be aware of the variability issue when providing solutions, tools 
and frameworks to understand and deal with this variability. 
3.2. d2: value the infrequent behaviour 
while infrequent behaviour could be considered as noise in a general 
scenario, it can be a source of valuable knowledge in the healthcare 
domain. healthcare is known for being especially prone to workarounds , 
i.e., intentional deviations from prescribed practices [60]. therefore, 
infrequent behaviour typically needs to be considered in pm4h. for 
example, nurses must check the vital signs of a patient before a 
consultation with a physician, and should immediately register the 
scores in the his. however, an analysis of the process might show that 
nurses keep track of the scores on a notepad and insert all the table 2 
sepsis patients event log example, based on [26].  
case 
id activity timestamp transaction 
type resource … 
… … … … …  
253 er triage 04–13-2021 
11:33:50 complete nurse 1 … 
255 release a 04–13-2021 
11:35:05 complete physician 
02 … 
259 lactic acid 04–13-2021 
11:38:55 complete nurse 4 … 
254 leucocytes 04–13-2021 
11:41:23 complete nurse 5 … 
256 lactic acid 04–13-2021 
11:52:35 complete nurse 4 … 
257 er triage 04–13-2021 
11:53:16 complete nurse 7 … 
258 er 
registration 04–13-2021 
11:54:47 complete nurse 8 … 
253 admission 
nc 04–13-2021 
11:55:26 complete physician 
02 … 
259 admission ic 04–13-2021 
11:58:30 complete physician 
03 … 
260 crp 04–13-2021 
12:01:12 complete nurse 07 … 
261 release b 04–13-2021 
12:02:00 complete physician 
03 … 
253 iv liquid 04–13-2021 
12:05:33 complete nurse 2 … 
… … … … … …  j. munoz-gama et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          journal of biomedical informatics 127 (2022) 103994
7information later in their shifts [61,62] . such workarounds provide in-
sights in common inefficiencies and obstacles that healthcare actors face 
in their daily work. these insights provide a basis for a thorough anal-
ysis, enabling healthcare organisations to improve their processes [63]. 
in the aforementioned example, a shortage of computers and significant 
time pressure before the consultation with a physician could explain 
workarounds, providing valuable input for improvement actions [61]. 
workarounds can also highlight that different paths through a treatment 
process lead to the same outcome, providing information about relevant 
treatment variations to treat a particular disease [64]. 
it follows that pm4h researchers and practitioners must go beyond 
simply filtering out infrequent behaviour from the event log. in contrast, 
they should try to understand why infrequent behaviour is observed and 
what this could mean. they should be aware that focusing on models of 
the typical execution of the process can result in blind spots, causing 
them to miss important opportunities for process improvement. 
3.3. d3: use guidelines and protocols 
over the past decades, evidence-based medicine has emerged as a process in which researchers and practitioners in the field of medicine 
continuously search for unbiased clinically-relevant information [51]. 
the evidence-based medicine paradigm has been accompanied by an 
increasing presence of clinical practice guidelines and protocols [65,66] . 
clinical practice guidelines are systematically structured mechanisms 
which assist practitioners in determining the appropriate healthcare 
procedures for specific clinical circumstances [67] and, hence, consti -
tute reference processes. the abundant presence of guidelines and pro-
tocols provides rich opportunities for process mining in the healthcare 
domain, compared to other domains where reference processes are ab-
sent [68]. these opportunities are twofold. firstly, guidelines and pro-
tocols can facilitate the application of process mining. for instance, the 
available guidelines can be seen as prescriptive models to which the 
actual execution of the process can be compared using conformance 
checking algorithms [69] and similarity-based techniques [70–73]. in 
this way, pm4h practitioners can use the structured information pro-
vided by guidelines to select relevant events during event log generation 
[27], and to formally define the activities – with the associated activity 
labels – that will be considered by process discovery algorithms when 
generating the models [74,75] . secondly, process mining can provide 
fig. 3.process map discovered using the disco software and the sepsis patients data [26].  j. munoz-gama et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          journal of biomedical informatics 127 (2022) 103994
8the evidence required to improve guidelines and protocols by assessing 
their effectiveness and efficiency. similarly, this generated evidence can 
be used to customise existing global standardisation efforts to the spe-
cific characteristics of local contexts in an affordable and effective way 
[76]. 
in summary, pm4h researchers and practitioners should be aware of 
the existing guidelines and protocols in their specific setting, such that 
they can be maximally leveraged during the preparation and analysis of 
an event log. 
3.4. d4: break the glass 
‘d3: use guidelines and protocols’ highlights that standardised 
guidelines and protocols aim to establish high-level structure for 
healthcare processes. however, following the metaphor of a fire alarm, 
physicians and healthcare professionals might need to break the glass and 
deviate from the protocols that are in place. such situations can occur 
both at the level of an individual patient and at the level of the system. 
at the patient level, alternative courses of action might need to be taken 
due to previously unknown co-morbidities, unexpected complications, 
patient preferences, or because certain (combinations of) co-morbidities 
are not covered by the existing guidelines [77–79]. at the system level, 
emergency situations might follow from a sudden surge in the number of 
incoming patients or an unforeseen reduction in staff availability [78]. 
thus, healthcare processes deal with unplanned situations due to un-
foreseen emergencies or the optimization of the limited resources 
available. 
when physicians and healthcare professionals react to unforeseen or 
emergency situations, this is, of course, also reflected in the data. this 
behaviour gives rise to unexpected patterns in the data, which stresses 
the importance of considering contextual information when conducting 
process mining analyses in healthcare [80]. contextual information, 
such as patient characteristics or the state of the system at a particular 
point in time, can be essential to explain patterns observed in the data. 
this understanding can enable a pm4h researcher to systematically 
analyse the desirability of deviations from protocols, taking into account 
rich contextual information. hence, considering the context can high-
light the need to fine-tune protocols or provide input for developing 
future policies of a healthcare institution. 
in sum, pm4h researchers and practitioners need to be aware of the 
existence of break the glass situations. moreover, building upon the 
available contextual information, they can try to identify and under -
stand such situations. 
3.5. d5: consider data at multiple abstraction levels 
it is a common misconception that pm4h only uses medical treat-
ment data and, hence, is a synonym for medical treatment analysis. 
medical treatment analysis is, without doubt, an important use case for 
pm4h [10], with a multitude of examples being reported in medical 
domains such as oncology [81], cardiology [82], primary care [83], and 
frail elderly care [84]. however, a wide spectrum of different types of 
data is available in the healthcare domain, both related to clinical pro-
cesses as well as to organisational/administrative processes [6,7,85]. 
a key distinction can be made between high-level data and low-level 
data. low-level data are very fine-grained data, which is recorded by 
medical equipment or sensors at healthcare facilities. typically, some 
form of aggregation is required to retrieve meaningful patterns from 
large volumes of fine-grained data [86]. for instance, event data 
recorded by medical equipment, such as an allura xper x-ray system, 
can be used to construct realistic test profiles for fault diagnosis to 
identify new problems before they actually emerge [87]. another source 
of low-level data are technologies such as wearable devices and real- 
time localisation systems. the deployment of these technologies by 
healthcare organisations has experienced a remarkable increase in 
recent years, and their data has been successfully used as input for process mining to analyse patient pathways [88], and to gain insights in 
personalised chronic disease management [89]. in surgical procedures, 
even when surgical robots have not been used, alternative sources of 
low-level data – such as video recordings – can be used to identify ac-
tivities, in order to analyse a particular procedure [28,29]. 
high-level data, which are more coarse, typically allow obtaining 
more meaningful patterns during the analysis without the need for ag-
gregation. data that is typically recorded in a hospital information 
system or administrative data often have a more high-level character. 
due to this high-level character, such data might be suitable for cross- 
organisational comparisons, e.g., to share best practices amongst 
healthcare organisations [90]. knowledge sharing regarding processes 
can be especially relevant in situations such as the covid-19 crisis [2]. 
consequently, cross-organisational comparisons can be of interest for 
the pm4h discipline. 
given the multitude of high-level and low-level data sources avail-
able in a typical healthcare organisation, a pm4h researcher and prac-
titioner is likely to be confronted with different types of data. such data 
include logistics, billing, accounting, staff, and payroll information, and 
can be used to answer important questions in topics such as shift man-
agement, bed management, patient admission, transfer and diversion 
policies [91]. moreover, as different stakeholders have different infor-
mation needs, a pm4h research question under analysis might require 
the combination of very distinct data sources. 
3.6. d6: involve a multidisciplinary team 
healthcare processes are increasingly having a multidisciplinary 
character [37]. similarly, data science is, in its nature, multidisciplinary 
[92], and process mining is no exception [8]. any type of process 
analysis could possibly include techniques from other computer science 
disciplines, such as artificial intelligence, machine learning, and com-
puter vision [93]. 
besides the potential involvement of expertise from the aforemen -
tioned computer science fields, pm4h researchers and practitioners 
should always recognise the multidisciplinary nature of healthcare 
processes, necessitating the involvement of extensive expertise from the 
healthcare domain. in order to ensure the relevance of pm4h tech-
niques, the involvement of physicians, nurses and other healthcare 
professionals from all relevant departments is essential. from a practical 
angle, a multidisciplinary team should be composed, which is closely 
involved in all stages of the process mining effort: data collection, data 
analysis, data interpretation, the communication of its results and its 
translation to practical actions. 
when working in this multidisciplinary context, pm4h researchers 
and practitioners should take the following considerations into account. 
firstly, the team should consider other clinicians, besides physicians. as 
an example, many insightful pm4h studies in the literature demonstrate 
a deep involvement of nurses in the generation of their findings [61]. 
secondly, pm4h projects must use the appropriate medical language, 
terminology, codes and customs to ensure mutual understanding in a 
multidisciplinary context. in this regard, a broad range of standards and 
ontologies on medical concepts, such as medications, procedures, and 
diagnoses, already exist. examples of standardised terminologies are 
well established clinical ontologies such as snomed ct and icd-10 
[94]. 
3.7. d7: focus on the patient 
many actors are involved in a typical healthcare process. these 
include patients, the patients’ relatives, physicians, nurses, other 
healthcare professionals and supporting staff. as mentioned in ‘d6: 
involve a multidisciplinary team’, different staff categories should be 
involved in a process mining project team. however, it needs to be 
recognised that the patient is at the heart of all healthcare processes. 
hence, pm4h researchers should always make sure to look at a process j. munoz-gama et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          journal of biomedical informatics 127 (2022) 103994
9from the patient’s perspective, even when they might not be explicitly 
represented in the project team. this point implies that the patient 
perspective should receive explicit attention when developing methods, 
tools, and frameworks. in this way, pm4h can support healthcare or-
ganisations into providing patient-centred care, a key indicator for care 
quality [95,96]. 
when considering the journey of a patient with a particular medical 
condition, it should be recognised that the patient typically crosses the 
boundaries of several healthcare organisations. besides the hospital, a 
patient might also visit other professionals such as a general practitioner 
and a paramedic. pm4h researchers need to take this cross- 
organisational character of the patient journey into account as data 
will also be spread over various organisations [7]. even when consid -
ering a process within a single healthcare organisation, a patient- 
centered approach requires a specific mindset as process mining ana-
lyses typically focus on gaining insights into processes at the system 
level. in contrast, clinicians tend to focus on care for individual patients, 
which can have implications on the performance of the system as a 
whole. for instance: when a physician wants to completely finish a 
procedure for one patient before assessing new patients, this might lead 
to increasing waiting times at the system level. this example highlights 
that, next to the system perspective, pm4h research should also be 
aware of the individual patient when studying processes. this analysis 
involves both the clinical perspective as well as the patient experience 
perspective. 
3.8. d8: think about white-box approaches 
physicians face difficult situations and decisions in their daily 
routine. despite their extensive training, decisions on the required di-
agnostics and treatments for a patient will rely on a risk–benefit 
assessment by a physician, which will be context-dependent. the un-
precedented advances in artificial intelligence and machine learning 
have fostered new decision support systems delivering accurate infor-
mation to support physicians when making clinical decisions. however, 
one of the biggest challenges is that physicians are reluctant to trust and 
adopt recommendations by a system that they do not fully understand, 
referring to it as a black box [97]. 
to enable the data-driven improvement of healthcare processes, 
there is a need for white box approaches that enable healthcare actors to 
understand the origins of particular observations. process mining tech-
niques are perceived as white boxes [98], since their final goal is not to 
provide a categorical answer, but to provide healthcare actors with 
techniques to get a better understanding of what is going on in their 
processes. the strength of process mining lies in its focus on under -
standability. therefore, pm4h researchers and practitioners should be 
aware of the critical importance of understandability. in that respect, 
they should be prepared to use novel visualisation techniques and 
interactive models that advance the field in the direction of providing 
healthcare professionals with the insights they need in an understand -
able way [99]. moreover, there are decisions that cannot always be 
made effectively based on few parameters and constructs (from simple 
switch-case patterns to complex dmn features). those decision points 
can benefit from more understandable formalisms, such as computer- 
interpretable clinical guidelines (cigs) [78] allows the enactment 
evidence-based recommendations intended to optimize patient care 
[100]. finally, pm4h researchers and practitioners need to recognise 
that approaches that recommend and explain various courses of action are 
more likely to be accepted than counterparts that ‘enforce’ a particular 
one [101]. 
3.9. d9: generate sensitive and low-quality data 
when performing process mining in a healthcare context, in partic -
ular in a clinical setting, data sensitivity needs to be taken into account. 
the data at hand might include information such as a patient’s current medical condition, co-morbidities, treatments, etc. as a consequence, 
healthcare-related event logs must be handled carefully. healthcare data 
are well-known for being sensitive because of its confidentiality, and its 
usage, storage, and transfer is strictly regulated by institutions, coun-
tries, and even international treaties [102]. therefore, as responsible 
citizens, pm4h practitioners must consider ethics in general and data 
privacy, either when conducting a primary (e.g., to improve patients 
outcomes) or secondary use (e.g., to improve health services outcomes) 
of the data [103]. 
next to data privacy, poor data quality is also an important issue 
within the healthcare domain. in many countries, healthcare processes 
are still paper-based to a certain extent, which presents challenges to 
attach precise timestamps to activities that have been conducted. even 
though integrated hiss are becoming more pervasive, this does not 
guarantee high-quality data [104]. as shown in several existing works, 
healthcare processes tend to be characterised by poor quality data 
[62,105,106]. a variety of data quality issues can be identified, 
including missing events, imprecise timestamps, and incorrect time-
stamps [5,62]. the presence of data quality problems can be attributed, 
at least partly, to the fact that event recording often still requires a 
manual action from clinicians or administrative staff. when, for 
instance, an activity is not recorded in the hiss at the time that it was 
performed, the timestamp of the associated event will not correspond 
with the activity execution time. moreover, clinicians tend to develop 
their own habits in terms of system registrations, e.g. based on their 
personal interpretation of the situation and the registration options 
provided by the system. the latter can give rise to different registration 
patterns across clinicians involved in the same process. 
from the previous, it follows that pm4h is intrinsically connected to 
the need for explicit attention to data privacy and data quality. hence, 
pm4h researchers and practitioners need to take both of these concepts 
carefully into account when they have the ambition to support the 
management and improvement of real-life healthcare processes. 
3.10. d10: handle rapid evolutions and new paradigms 
healthcare is a domain that exhibits rapid and continuous evolu -
tions, which also has implications for healthcare processes. a prime 
example is the change in healthcare processes due to the accumulation 
of knowledge from clinical research [7,51,65,66]. this principle of 
evidence-based medicine is based on the critical appraisal of various 
types of scientific studies such as randomized controlled trials and 
cohort studies. high-quality research findings are integrated in clinical 
practice, which can induce changes in diagnostic or treatment processes 
[107,108]. in a similar vein, rapid evolutions in technology also impact 
processes in healthcare. for instance: mobile health solutions present 
various opportunities to reshape healthcare processes. this relates, 
amongst others, to remote monitoring, which enables healthcare pro-
fessionals to follow-up specific clinical parameters remotely [109]. 
healthcare does not only evolve due to new clinical knowledge or 
technological advances, but also due to the emergence of novel para-
digms. for instance, the patient-centered care paradigm implies that 
care should carefully consider the needs, values and preferences of each 
individual patient [110]. within this context, patient-reported measures 
are increasingly gaining attention. in this respect, a distinction is made 
between patient-reported outcome measures (proms), focusing on 
health aspects such as symptoms and treatment side effects, and patient- 
reported experience measures (prems), centering around experiences 
when receiving care [111]. both proms and prems constitute highly 
valuable output to evaluate and redesign healthcare processes. 
in order to provide valuable contributions to the healthcare domain, 
the pm4h community should be able to handle rapid evolutions and new 
paradigms. this requires a permanent awareness of new trends and in-
novations, as well as a careful assessment of their impact on healthcare 
processes and, hence, pm4h. advances in the healthcare domain might 
give rise to new information needs, on which pm4h researchers and j. munoz-gama et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          journal of biomedical informatics 127 (2022) 103994
10practitioners should anticipate. 
4.challenges 
the previous section outlined the distinguishing characteristics of 
healthcare processes. these characteristics give rise to challenges that 
need to be studied by the pm4h community – both researchers and 
practitioners – to structurally embed process mining in the healthcare 
domain as an instrument to support evidence-based process analysis and 
continuous improvement. at the research level, the outlined challenges 
will require fundamental and translational research, where the latter is 
needed to support the actual uptake of fundamental research in 
healthcare practice. the challenges are meant to guide both aspiring and 
established pm4h researchers in their search for relevant research en-
deavors. similar to the distinguishing characteristics, we do not claim 
that the challenges are exclusive to the healthcare domain. however, we 
consider them particularly relevant to move pm4h forward in the 
future. 
the remainder of this section will outline the key challenges for 
pm4h. each subsection’s title will also link the challenge to one or more 
of the distinguishing characteristics by using the labels introduced in 
section 3. 
4.1. c1: design dedicated/tailored methodologies and frameworks (d1 
– d9) 
given the distinguishing characteristics outlined in section 3, the 
domain needs novel pm4h methodologies and frameworks, which guide 
researchers and practitioners through the various phases of a pm4h 
analysis. such an analysis ranges from the identification of the research 
problem, through the composition of the event log (taking into account 
considerations regarding privacy and security), to the actual analysis 
and interpretation of the results [7]. new methodologies and frame -
works should remain flexible, such that they can be adapted to the 
specific characteristics of a country, institution, department, process, 
clinician, or even the patient involved. 
general process mining methodologies, such as l*[8], pm2 [112] 
and aguirre et al. [113], were key factors in the rising popularity of 
process mining, since they opened the door for researchers of other 
disciplines to apply process mining to a wide range of contexts [114]. in 
an analogous way, healthcare-specific methodologies for pm4h will 
allow healthcare actors to incorporate process mining into their analysis 
[115–117]. moreover, such frameworks may allow pm4h techniques to 
be reused in different contexts, providing the means for a fair compar -
ison among techniques across different scenarios [118]. frameworks for 
cross-organisational [90] and cross-national [75] studies are also an 
interesting research line to advance the pm4h state-of-the-art, as well as 
the generation of methodologies to conduct meta-analyses based on 
outcomes and metrics obtained with pm4h techniques [119]. 
4.2. c2: discover beyond discovery (d3, d5) 
as highlighted in section 2, process mining techniques are 
commonly classified into three types: discovery, conformance, and 
enhancement [8]. however, the evolution of these three types of tech-
niques over time has not been the same [120]. initially, most of the 
process mining techniques were discovery techniques, making it the 
dominant research stream in the early days of process mining. in later 
years, conformance checking has gradually started gaining prominence, 
and more recently, the number of novel enhancement techniques are 
starting to rise significantly. recently, there has also been a surge of 
novel techniques, such as event and trace abstraction techniques [86], 
simulation [121], and predictive process monitoring [122]. 
pm4h manifests a similar evolution, where discovery is the most 
dominant use case in published pm4h literature [10,81–84,41]. 
although works that focus on discovery are highly relevant, novel conformance checking and enhancement techniques, tailored towards 
healthcare, are needed. some seminal works have been proposed that 
explore conformance for healthcare [123–125]. however, they are still 
in their infancy, making significant potential for future growth, espe-
cially because conformance checking approaches can be used to eval-
uate the various guidelines and protocols that exist in healthcare (‘d3: 
use guidelines and protocols’). similarly, some enhancement techniques 
have been proposed for healthcare, but there is still a lot to explore 
[126], especially regarding highly relevant process perspectives for 
healthcare such as the time perspective [52,127] and the resource 
perspective [30]. these two perspectives appear to be particularly 
promising since they can support the long term resource planning and 
service (re-) design of healthcare organisations [128]. process mining 
can also help to build advanced simulation and forecasting models for 
the operations of healthcare departments (e.g. the emergency depart -
ment) or for diagnostic-therapeutic pathways (e.g. patients suffering 
from breast cancer) [115,129]. 
4.3. c3: mind the concept drift (d1, d3, d4) 
clinical practice guidelines and protocols tend to change over time, 
e.g., due to advances in clinical research [7,51,65,66]. even without 
changes to guidelines and protocols, the execution of healthcare pro-
cesses could change, for instance, due to seasonal factors, to cope with 
the influx of patients in a hospital during winter months, or because an 
alternative way of working is introduced. gaining insights into such 
dynamic processes is challenging and can benefit from techniques to 
detect changes in the process and determine their effects. 
to this end, research on concept drift, which refers to the phenom -
enon whereby processes change over time, is essential [130–132]. the 
evolution of the covid-19 treatment process over time is an obvious 
illustration of this phenomenon [133]. moreover, distinguishing char-
acteristics such as the high variability of healthcare processes also make 
it challenging to identify and study change patterns. while these aspects 
show the need for further dedicated research efforts, concept drift 
should systematically be taken into account in pm4h. 
4.4. c4: deal with reality (d2, d5, d9) 
‘in theory there is no difference between theory and practice, while in 
practice there is’. this proverb seems to have particular significance for 
pm4h. whenever a novel pm4h technique is being developed, thorough 
testing and evaluation is a key element [118,134]. similar to any general 
process mining technique, synthetic data can be used during the 
development of a pm4h technique in order to evaluate its performance 
in a controlled environment. however, pm4h research has the goal to 
generate research with societal impact and, hence, research should focus 
on novel approaches able to handle real-life healthcare data. moreover, 
the techniques should be able to handle large amounts of data and cope 
with input data containing significant variability. carefully considering 
real-life healthcare data is crucial as it can significantly influence the 
premises and design of the pm4h domain. when a researcher does not 
have access to real-life data due to the absence of partnerships with 
healthcare institutions, publicly available healthcare datasets can be 
used instead18. in this respect, community efforts can also be made in the 
direction of providing and maintaining extensively documented, pub-
licly accessible datasets to pm4h researchers and practitioners. 
4.5. c5: do it yourself (diy) (d6, d8) 
as outlined in ‘d6: involve a multidisciplinary team’, pm4h is a 
multidisciplinary domain that requires the involvement of physicians, 
18 examples of public healthcare logs are available at https://www.pods4h. 
com/pods4h j. munoz-gama et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          journal of biomedical informatics 127 (2022) 103994
11nurses, and other healthcare professionals. to support a widespread use 
of process mining, healthcare professionals should be able to perform 
their analyses with little or no assistance of process mining experts. this 
direct involvement of healthcare actors has several implications that 
need to be taken into account when pm4h researchers propose new 
techniques. firstly, during technique development, healthcare actors 
should be targeted as end users. therefore, techniques should not 
require extensive expertise in terms of process mining in order to be used 
correctly. secondly, the output of techniques should be understandable 
for healthcare actors. for instance, in case of control-flow discovery, the 
process modelling notation used to visualise the output should be 
appropriate for non-process mining experts from the healthcare domain 
[7]. to that end, simple visualisations, such as directly-follows graphs 
(dfgs) [135] and business process modelling and notation (bpmn) 
diagrams [136,137], may be effective. however, when using notations 
without formal semantics, it is important to consider their well-known 
limitations, such as the risk for misleading statistics and ambiguous vi-
sualizations [138]. finally, all tools or software developed in pm4h 
research should be user-friendly, with specific attention to terminology, 
human–computer interaction, and visualisations. 
4.6. c6: pay attention to data quality (d9) 
the ‘garbage in - garbage out’ principle also holds for pm4h, implying 
that the quality of all analyses ultimately depends upon the quality of 
the data used as input. as mentioned in ‘d9: generate sensitive and low- 
quality data’, real-life data from hiss tends to suffer from data quality 
issues, which is troublesome for the use of these data for process mining 
purposes. the widespread presence of data quality issues stresses the 
need for the development of techniques to systematically assess and 
improve the quality of healthcare event logs. recent approaches that 
have been developed, for example [62,139–142], demonstrate the 
relevance of this research topic. a recent overview on event log quality 
in pm4h is presented in martin [106]. while existing approaches typi-
cally focus on data quality in the context of an existing event log, it 
should be recognised that data quality issues are also related to data 
management and extraction. this is because stakeholders typically have 
difficulties extracting this data  [143]. 
given the direct impact of data quality issues on the outcomes of 
process mining and the high prevalence of such issues in a healthcare 
context, it is a challenge to raise awareness about the topic within the 
healthcare sector [104]. key players, such as hospital managers and 
physicians, should consider the impact of data quality issues on potential 
process mining analyses. besides improving awareness, techniques to 
support the (interactive) identification of data quality issues, as well as 
their rectification (if possible) are valuable [144]. moreover, analysis 
outcomes should also contain a reflection on the quality of the under -
lying data [7]. when interpreting the results, expressing the uncertainty 
degree of process mining outcomes can reflect the required level of 
caution on the part of healthcare actors. this aspect is especially 
important when process mining insights will be used within the context 
of clinical decision-making. 
4.7. c7: take care of privacy and security (d9) 
pm4h, especially when used in a clinical context, builds upon sen-
sitive data regarding patients. adequately safeguarding data privacy and 
security is of key importance for pm4h, which include responsible data 
science aspects such as fairness (avoiding prejudice) and confidentiality 
(not revealing sensitive information) [145]. in the broader process 
mining community, the importance of data privacy and security has 
already been recognised in the process mining manifesto [146]. however, 
actual research contributions focusing on privacy-preserving techniques 
targeted to process-related data only started to appear recently 
[147,148]. it still remains difficult to balance safeguarding privacy on 
the one hand and preserving the value of the event log for process mining purposes on the other hand [102]. 
while anonymisation and other privacy-preserving techniques can 
support healthcare organisations when creating an event log suitable for 
data exchange (e.g., between a hospital and research partners), pm4h 
could also explore alternative modus operandi to enable the collaboration 
between researchers and healthcare organisations limiting the need for 
data exchange. establishing methods to efficiently set up such collabo -
rations can move pm4h forward, as it reduces the risk of data breaches. 
this point is especially relevant in times where data privacy and security 
concerns tend to make healthcare organisations more reluctant to share 
data for research purposes. 
4.8. c8: look at the process through the patient’s eyes (d7) 
within the context of a process mining project, information needs 
can differ depending on the involved stakeholder. as mentioned earlier, 
potential stakeholders in the healthcare domain include hospital man-
agers, physicians, nurses, patients, and their relatives [7]. currently, 
many process mining initiatives in healthcare target hospital manage -
ment, heads of department or clinicians and often aim to provide a high- 
level overview of process behaviour. however, as reflected by particu -
larity ‘d7: focus on the patient’, all processes directly or indirectly focus 
on the patient. 
against this background, there is a need for studying healthcare 
processes through the patient’s eyes: what is the patient’s journey while 
being diagnosed or treated for a particular (potentially chronic) condi -
tion? studying a process from the patient’s perspective can help physi -
cians to consider the full patient journey when making decisions at a 
particular point in time. even when adopting the patient’s perspective 
does not directly result in options to improve the clinical or adminis -
trative outcomes, it might bring ways to the uncover on how to enhance 
the patient’s experience [149,150]. looking at the process from the 
patient’s eyes also should consider the combination of data from various 
departments, and even different healthcare institutions [7]. in this way, 
process mining analyses will move from a single department/institution 
perspective to a cross department/institution perspective. this point of 
view constitutes a complementary perspective to existing process min-
ing research in healthcare. 
4.9. c9: complement hiss with the process perspective (d2,d4,d5) 
as important as focusing on the data and their uses for process 
mining, pm4h research must also focus on the source of the data, the 
health information systems (hiss), which can include from more 
traditional hospital information systems [151,152] to more integrated 
information systems [153]. such systems could benefit from being 
complemented with the process perspective, giving their processes a 
more predominant role, and interacting with process awareness systems 
to support both the operations of the organisation and the processes 
involved [154]. this combination will open the door for process mining 
to many of the benefits of systems with a strong process perspective 
–such as process-aware information systems (paiss) [155]–, but will 
also require research and study of the inherent problems and future 
directions of both hiss [156] and their process awareness combination 
[157]. this study must include the understanding of how hiss must 
integrate the different healthcare data sources (‘d5: consider data at 
multiple abstraction levels’), and handle unexpected behaviour when an 
unpredictable event occurs (‘d4: break the glass’) or when a deadline 
will be violated [158] (‘d2: value the infrequent behaviour’), even being 
able to perform immediate decision making while analyzing the data in 
real time (e.g., streaming process mining) [159]. 
4.10. c10: evolve in symbiosis with the developments in the healthcare 
domain (d1, d3, d7, d10) 
healthcare is a domain that continuously develops due to j. munoz-gama et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          journal of biomedical informatics 127 (2022) 103994
12innovations in, amongst others, medicines, medical procedures and 
technologies. in order to support healthcare professionals on an ongoing 
basis, pm4h methods should evolve in symbiosis with the developments 
in healthcare. for instance: treatment processes are rapidly being 
adapted based on emerging scientific evidence [2]. a clear illustration is 
the covid-19 treatment process, which rapidly changed due to the 
accumulation of new insights in the virus and its treatment [133,160] . 
pm4h should be able to cope with these circumstances. moreover, 
pm4h can support the adaptation of treatment processes by, e.g., 
enabling the efficient comparison of processes with respect to the clin-
ical outcomes they generate. 
another important evolution in healthcare is the prominent presence 
of personalised medicine, which implies that medical treatments are 
increasingly tailored towards the needs of each individual patient 
[50,161] . in order to support personalised medicine, pm4h can develop 
techniques to efficiently assess the suitability of a particular treatment 
process for a patient with a specific profile. for instance, valero-ramon 
et al. [89] recently proposed an approach to discover dynamic risk 
models for patients suffering from chronic diseases based on sensor data. 
these models can be leveraged to customise treatments based on a pa-
tient ’s unique behaviour [89]. when process data can be enriched with 
outcome and cost data, pm4h also has the potential to study the effect of 
personalised treatment processes compared to standard practice in 
detail. 
5.concluding remarks 
the goal of this paper is to support the pm4h domain by conveying a 
shared perspective regarding the distinguishing characteristics of 
healthcare processes and the associated key challenges of pm4h. in 
particular, ten distinguishing characteristics and ten challenges are 
outlined, the latter requiring specific attention of the pm4h community. 
in order to tackle the key challenges, close collaboration is required 
between experts from various domains. in that respect, the symbiosis 
between data- and process-related expertise on the one hand and clinical 
expertise on the other is essential. within a research context, close 
interaction is required between research fields including medicine, 
medical informatics, computer science, and business process manage -
ment. to make pm4h flourish, researchers from these various fields 
need to join forces in a spirit of co-creation. in this way, they may be able 
to develop innovative process mining methods that maximally support 
clinicians and decision-makers to manage and improve real-world 
healthcare processes in an evidence-based way. 
while this paper shapes the identity of pm4h, there is no intention to 
position pm4h as an isolated domain. on the contrary: as a relatively 
young research field, the pm4h community should actively connect to 
and learn from more mature fields such as artificial intelligence, data 
mining and machine learning [162,163] . the strengths of pm4h will be 
based on intelligently combining insights from various research areas. 
this intersection of disciplines will increasingly involve research on big 
data, the internet of things and deep learning [164 –166]. translating 
concepts and techniques from various other research fields to the pm4h 
setting will present continuous research challenges. hence, there is 
much to be done and much to be achieved. 
declaration of competing interest 
the authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
acknowledgements 
this work is partially supported by anid fondecyt 1220202, 
direcci ˘on de investigaci ˘on de la vicerrectoría de investigaci ˘on de la 
pontificia universidad cat˘olica de chile - puente [grant no. 026/ 2021]; and agencia nacional de investigaci ˘on y desarrollo [grant nos. 
anid-pfcha/doctorado nacional/2019 –21190116, anid-pfcha/ 
doctorado nacional/2020 –21201411]. with regard to the co-author 
hilda klasky, this manuscript has been authored by ut-battelle, llc, 
under contract de-ac05-00or22725 with the us department of energy 
(doe). the us government retains and the publisher, by accepting the 
article for publication, acknowledges that the us government retains a 
nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or 
reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do 
so, for us government purposes. doe will provide public access to these 
results of federally sponsored research in accordance with the doe 
public access plan (http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access- 
plan). 
references 
[1]r.e. herzlinger, why innovation in health care is so hard, harvard bus. rev. 84 
(5) (2006) 58–66. 
[2]n. peiffer-smadja, j.-c. lucet, g. bendjelloul, l. bouadma, s. gerard, c. choquet, 
s. jacques, a. khalil, p. maisani, e. casalino, et al., challenges and issues about 
organizing a hospital to respond to the covid-19 outbreak: experience from a 
french reference centre, clin. microbiol. infect. 26 (6) (2020) 669–672. 
[3]e. coiera, e.s. hovenga, building a sustainable health system, yearbook med. 
inform. 16 (1) (2007) 11–18. 
[4]p.r. harper, a framework for operational modelling of hospital resources, health 
care manage. sci. 5 (3) (2002) 165–173. 
[5]r.s. mans, w.m.p. van der aalst, r.j.b. vanwersch, process mining in healthcare: 
evaluating and exploiting operational healthcare processes, springer 
international publishing, heidelberg, 2015 . 
[6]r. lenz, m. peleg, and m. reichert, ”healthcare process support: achievements, 
challenges, current research, ” international journal of knowledge-based 
organizations, vol. 2, no. 4, 2012. 
[7]n. martin, j. de weerdt, c. fern˘andez-llatas, a. gal, r. gatta, g. ib˘a nez, o. 
johnson, f. mannhardt, l. marco-ruiz, s. mertens, et al., ”recommendations for 
enhancing the usability and understandability of process mining in healthcare, ” 
artificial intelligence in medicine, vol. 109, 2020. 
[8]w.m.p. van der aalst, process mining: data science in action, springer-verlag, 
berlin heidelberg, heidelberg, 2016 . 
[9]z. huang, w. dong, l. ji, l. yin, h. duan, on local anomaly detection and 
analysis for clinical pathways, artif. intell. med. 65 (3) (2015) 167–177. 
[10] e. rojas, j. munoz-gama, m. sepúlveda, d. capurro, process mining in 
healthcare: a literature review, j. biomed. inform. 61 (2016) 224–236. 
[11] a. augusto, r. conforti, m. dumas, m. la rosa, f.m. maggi, a. marrella, 
m. mecella, a. soo, automated discovery of process models from event logs: 
review and benchmark, ieee trans. knowl. data eng. 31 (4) (2018) 686–705. 
[12] j. carmona, b. van dongen, a. solti, m. weidlich, conformance checking, 
springer international publishing, heidelberg, 2018 . 
[13] c. cabanillas, l. ackermann, s. schonig, c. sturm, j. mendling, the ralph miner 
for automated discovery and verification of resource-aware process models, 
software and systems modeling 19 (6) (2020) 1415 –1441 . 
[14] p. barach, j. johnson, understanding the complexity of redesigning care around 
the clinical microsystem, bmj quality & safety 15 (suppl 1) (2006) i10–i16. 
[15] t. bodenheimer, c. sinsky, from triple to quadruple aim: care of the patient 
requires care of the provider, the annals of family medicine 12 (6) (2014) 
573–576. 
[16] d.m. berwick, t.w. nolan, j. whittington, the triple aim: care, health, and cost, 
health aff. 27 (3) (2008) 759–769. 
[17] m. kerremans, s. searle, t. srivastava, and k. iijima, “market guide for process 
mining, ” tech. rep., gartner, 2020. 
[18] ˘a. rebuge, d.r. ferreira, business process analysis in healthcare environments: a 
methodology based on process mining, information systems 37 (2) (2012) 
99–116. 
[19] c. di ciccio, a. marrella, a. russo, knowledge-intensive processes: 
characteristics, requirements and analysis of contemporary approaches, journal 
on data semantics 4 (1) (2015) 29–57. 
[20] s. mertens, f. gailly, g. poels, towards a decision-aware declarative process 
modeling language for knowledge-intensive processes, expert syst. appl. 87 
(2017) 316–334. 
[21] t.g. erdogan, a. tarhan, systematic mapping of process mining studies in 
healthcare, ieee access 6 (2018) 24543 –24567 . 
[22] m. dumas, m. rosa, j. mendling, h.a. reijers, fundamentals of business process 
management, springer, berlin heidelberg, 2018 . 
[23] g.t. jun, j. ward, z. morris, j. clarkson, health care process modelling: which 
method when? int. j. qual. health care 21 (3) (2009) 214–224. 
[24] h. scheuerlein, f. rauchfuss, y. dittmar, r. molle, t. lehmann, n. pienkos, 
u. settmacher, new methods for clinical pathways —business process modeling 
notation (bpmn) and tangible business process modeling (t.bpm), langenbeck ’s 
archives of surgery 397 (5) (2012) 755–761. 
[25] f. mannhardt, multi-perspective process mining, ceur workshop proceedings 
2196 (2018) 41–45. j. munoz-gama et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          journal of biomedical informatics 127 (2022) 103994
13[26] f. mannhardt, d. blind, analyzing the trajectories of patients with sepsis using 
process mining, ceur workshop proceedings 1859 (2017) 72–80. 
[27] s. remy, l. pufahl, j.p. sachs, e. bottinger, m. weske, event log generation in a 
health system: a case study, lect. notes comput. sci. 12168 (2020) 505–522. 
[28] l. leiva, j. munoz-gama, j. salas-morales, v. g˘alvez, w.l.j. lee, r. de la fuente, 
r. fuentes, m. sepúlveda, pomelog: generating event logs from unplugged 
processes, ceur workshop proceedings 2420 (2019) 189–193. 
[29] j. munoz-gama, v. galvez, r. de la fuente, m. sepúlveda, and r. fuentes, 
“interactive process mining for medical training, ” in interactive process mining in 
healthcare (c. fernandez-llatas, ed.), pp. 233–242, springer international 
publishing, 2021. 
[30] c. alvarez, e. rojas, m. arias, j. munoz-gama, m. sepúlveda, v. herskovic, 
d. capurro, discovering role interaction models in the emergency room using 
process mining, j. biomed. inform. 78 (2018) 60–77. 
[31] m. song, w.m.p. van der aalst, towards comprehensive support for 
organizational mining, decis. support syst. 46 (1) (2008) 300–317. 
[32] w.m.p. van der aalst, h.a. reijers, m. song, discovering social networks from 
event logs, computer supported cooperative work (cscw) 14 (6) (2005) 
549–593. 
[33] a. syamsiyah, b.f. van dongen, w.m.p. van der aalst, discovering social 
networks instantly: moving process mining computations to the database and 
data entry time, lecture notes in business information processing 287 (2017) 
51–67. 
[34] s. suriadi, m.t. wynn, j. xu, w.m.p. van der aalst, a.h. ter hofstede, discovering 
work prioritisation patterns from event logs, decis. support syst. 100 (2017) 
77–92. 
[35] j. de weerdt, f. caron, j. vanthienen, b. baesens, getting a grasp on clinical 
pathway data: an approach based on process mining, lect. notes comput. sci. 
7769 (2013) 22–35. 
[36] j. munoz-gama, “conformance checking, ” in encyclopedia of big data 
technologies (s. sakr and a.y. zomaya, eds.), springer, 2019. 
[37] t. conca, c. saint-pierre, v. herskovic, m. sepúlveda, d. capurro, f. prieto, 
c. fernandez-llatas, multidisciplinary collaboration in the treatment of patients 
with type 2 diabetes in primary care: analysis using process mining, journal of 
medical internet research 20 (4) (2018) e127. 
[38] d. fahland, w.m.p. van der aalst, model repair - aligning process models to 
reality, information systems 47 (2015) 220–243. 
[39] m. rovani, f.m. maggi, m. de leoni, w.m.p. van der aalst, declarative process 
mining in healthcare, expert syst. appl. 42 (23) (2015) 9236 –9251 . 
[40] c. combi, f. galetto, h.c. nakawala, g. pozzi, f. zerbato, enriching surgical 
process models by bpmn extensions for temporal durations, in: proceedings of 
the 36th annual acm symposium on applied computing, 2021, pp. 586–593. 
[41] e. batista and a. solanas, “process mining in healthcare: a systematic review, ” 
proceedings of the 9th international conference on information, intelligence, 
systems and applications (iisa), pp. 1–6, 2018. 
[42] f. taymouri, m.l. rosa, m. dumas, f.m. maggi, business process variant analysis: 
survey and classification, knowl.-based syst. 211 (2021) 106557 . 
[43] f. caron, j. vanthienen, k. vanhaecht, e.v. limbergen, j. deweerdt, b. baesens, 
a process mining-based investigation of adverse events in care processes, health 
information management journal 43 (1) (2014) 16–25. 
[44] w. yang and q. su, “process mining for clinical pathway: literature review and 
future directions, ” 2014 11th international conference on service systems and 
service management (icsssm), pp. 1–5, 2014. 
[45] f. caron, j. vanthienen, k. vanhaecht, e.v. limbergen, j. de weerdt, b. baesens, 
monitoring care processes in the gynecologic oncology department, comput. biol. 
med. 44 (2014) 88–96. 
[46] r. andrews, m.t. wynn, k. vallmuur, a.h.m. ter hofstede, and e. bosley, ”a 
comparative process mining analysis of road trauma patient pathways, ” 
international journal of environmental research and public health, vol. 17, no. 
10, 2020. 
[47] a.b. jensen, p.l. moseley, t.i. oprea, s.g. elles øe, r. eriksson, h. schmock, p. 
b. jensen, l.j. jensen, s. brunak, ”temporal disease trajectories condensed from 
population-wide registry data covering 6.2 million patients, ”, nature 
communications 5 (1) (2014) 4022 . 
[48] g. kusuma, a.p. kurniati, e. rojas, c.d. mcinerney, c.p. gale, o.a. johnson, 
process mining of disease trajectories: a literature review, studies in health 
technology and informatics 281 (2021) 457–461. 
[49] h. de oliveira, m. prodel, l. lamarsalle, m. inada-kim, k. ajayi, j. wilkins, 
s. sekelj, s. beecroft, s. snow, r. slater, et al., bow-tie optimal pathway discovery 
analysis of sepsis hospital admissions using the hospital episode statistics 
database in england, jamia open 3 (3) (2020) 439–448. 
[50] i.r. konig, o. fuchs, g. hansen, e. von mutius, and m.v. kopp, ”what is precision 
medicine?, ” european respiratory journal, vol. 50, no. 4, 2017. 
[51] d.l. sackett, w.m.c. rosenberg, m.j.a. gray, b.r. haynes, s.w. richardson, 
evidence based medicine: what it is and what it isn’t, bmj 312 (7023) (1996) 
71–72. 
[52] e. rojas, a. cifuentes, a. burattin, j. munoz-gama, m. sepúlveda, d. capurro, 
analysis of emergency room episodes duration through process mining, lecture 
notes in business information processing 342 (2018) 251–263. 
[53] j.f.j. vos, a. boonstra, a. kooistra, m. seelen, m. van offenbeek, the influence of 
electronic health record use on collaboration among medical specialties, bmc 
health services research 20 (1) (2020), 676-676 . 
[54] r.s. mans, m. schonenberg, m. song, w. van der aalst, p. bakker, process mining 
in healthcare, in: in proceedings of the international conference on health 
informatics, 2008, pp. 118–125. [55] s. pereira detro, e.a.p. santos, h. panetto, e.d. loures, m. lezoche, c. cabral 
moro barra, applying process mining and semantic reasoning for process model 
customisation in healthcare, enterprise information systems 14 (7) (2020) 
983–1009 . 
[56] c.p. mclaughlin, a.d. kaluzny, continuous quality improvement in health care, 
jones and bartlett publishers, sudbury, 2004 . 
[57] j. de weerdt, “trace clustering, ” encyclopedia of big data technologies, pp. 
1706 –1711, 2019. 
[58] s. smirnov, h.a. reijers, m. weske, from fine-grained to abstract process models: 
a semantic approach, information systems 37 (8) (2012) 784–797. 
[59] g. leonardi, m. striani, s. quaglini, a. cavallini, s. montani, leveraging semantic 
labels for multi-level abstraction in medical process mining and trace comparison, 
j. biomed. inform. 83 (2018) 10–24. 
[60] s. alter, theory of workarounds, communications of the association for 
information systems 34 (2014) 55. 
[61] i. beerepoot, x. lu, i. van de weerd, and h.a. reijers, “seeing the signs of 
workarounds: a mixed-methods approach to the detection of nurses ’ process 
deviations, ” proceedings of the 54th hawaii international conference on system 
sciences (hicss), pp. 1–10, 2021. 
[62] l. vanbrabant, n. martin, k. ramaekers, k. braekers, quality of input data in 
emergency department simulations: framework and assessment techniques, 
simul. model. pract. theory 91 (2019) 83–101. 
[63] i. beerepoot, i. van de weerd, h.a. reijers, the potential of workarounds for 
improving processes, lecture notes in business information processing 362 
(2019) 338–350. 
[64] m. robin dimatteo, p.j. giordani, h.s. lepper, and t.w. croghan, ”patient 
adherence and medical treatment outcomes: a meta-analysis, ” medical care, vol. 
40, no. 9, 2002. 
[65] a. ten teije, m. marcos, m. balser, j. van croonenborg, c. duelli, f. van 
harmelen, p. lucas, s. miksch, w. reif, k. rosenbrand, et al., improving medical 
protocols by formal methods, artif. intell. med. 36 (3) (2006) 193–209. 
[66] d. wang, m. peleg, s.w. tu, a.a. boxwala, r.a. greenes, v.l. patel, e. 
h. shortliffe, representation primitives, process models and patient data in 
computer-interpretable clinical practice guidelines: a literature review of 
guideline representation models, int. j. med. informatics 68 (1–3) (2002) 59–70. 
[67] k.n. lohr, m.j. field, et al., clinical practice guidelines: directions for a new 
program, national academies press, 1990 . 
[68] r. gatta, m. vallati, c. fernandez-llatas, a. martinez-millana, s. orini, l. sacchi, 
j. lenkowicz, m. marcos, j. munoz-gama, m.a. cuendet, et al., ”what role can 
process mining play in recurrent clinical guidelines issues? a position paper, ” 
international journal of environmental research and public health, vol. 17, no. 
18, 2020. 
[69] r. gatta, m. vallati, c. fern˘andez-llatas, a. martinez-millana, s. orini, l. sacchi, 
j. lenkowicz, m. marcos, j. munoz-gama, m.a. cuendet, b.d. bari, l. marco- 
ruiz, a. stefanini, m. castellano, clinical guidelines: a crossroad of many 
research areas. challenges and opportunities in process mining for healthcare, 
lecture notes in business information processing 362 (2019) 545–556. 
[70] s. montani, g. leonardi, s. quaglini, a. cavallini, g. micieli, a knowledge- 
intensive approach to process similarity calculation, expert syst. appl. 42 (9) 
(2015) 4207 –4215 . 
[71] r. bergmann, y. gil, similarity assessment and efficient retrieval of semantic 
workflows, information systems 40 (2014) 115–127. 
[72] m. la rosa, m. dumas, r. uba, r. dijkman, business process model merging: an 
approach to business process consolidation, acm transactions on software 
engineering and methodology 22 (2) (2013) 1–42. 
[73] a. goderis, p. li, c. goble, workflow discovery: the problem, a case study from e- 
science and a graph-based solution, ieee international conference on web 
services icws ’06 (2006) 312–319. 
[74] r. de la fuente, r. fuentes, j. munoz-gama, j. dagnino, m. sepúlveda, delphi 
method to achieve clinical consensus for a bpmn representation of the central 
venous access placement for training purposes, international journal of 
environmental research and public health 17 (11) (2020) . 
[75] r. de la fuente, e. kattan, j. munoz-gama, i. puente, m. navarrete, 
c. kychenthal, r. fuentes, s. bravo, v. galvez, m. sepúlveda, development of a 
comprehensive percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy process model for 
procedural training: a delphi-based experts consensus, acta anaesthesiol. scand. 
65 (2) (2021) 244–256. 
[76] s. timmermans, m. berg, standardization in action: achieving local universality 
through medical protocols, soc. stud. sci. 27 (2) (1997) 273–305. 
[77] l.o. karlsson, s. nilsson, m. bång, l. nilsson, e. charitakis, m. janzon, a clinical 
decision support tool for improving adherence to guidelines on anticoagulant 
therapy in patients with atrial fibrillation at risk of stroke: a cluster-randomized 
trial in a swedish primary care setting (the cds-af study), plos medicine 15 (3) 
(2018) 1–17. 
[78] m. peleg, computer-interpretable clinical guidelines: a methodological review, 
j. biomed. inform. 46 (4) (2013) 744–763. 
[79] d. roulin, m. muradbegovic, v. addor, c. blanc, n. demartines, m. hübner, 
enhanced recovery after elective colorectal surgery-reasons for non-compliance 
with the protocol, digestive surgery 34 (3) (2017) 220–226. 
[80] v. van andel, i. beerepoot, x. lu, i. van de weerd, h.a. reijers, deuce: a 
methodology for detecting unauthorized access of electronic health records using 
process mining, european conference on information systems (ecis) research 
papers (2021) . 
[81] a.p. kurniati, o. johnson, d. hogg, g. hall, process mining in oncology: a 
literature review, in: proceedings of the 6th international conference on 
information communication and management (icicm), 2016, pp. 291–297. j. munoz-gama et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          journal of biomedical informatics 127 (2022) 103994
14[82] g.p. kusuma, m. hall, c.p. gale, o.a. johnson, process mining in cardiology: a 
literature review, international journal of bioscience, biochemistry and 
bioinformatics 8 (2018) 226–236. 
[83] r. williams, e. rojas, n. peek, o.a. johnson, process mining in primary care: a 
literature review, building continents of knowledge in oceans of data: the 
future of co-created ehealth 247 (2018) 376–380. 
[84] n.f. farid, m. de kamps, and o.a. johnson, “process mining in frail elderly care: 
a literature review, ” proceedings of the 12th international joint conference on 
biomedical engineering systems and technologies, vol. 5, pp. 332–339, 2019. 
[85] h.b. klasky and o. ozmen, “process mining in healthcare - a case study for the 
corporate data warehouse of the veterans affairs office, ” tech. rep., office of 
scientific and technical information (osti), 2019. 
[86] s.j. van zelst, f. mannhardt, m. de leoni, a. koschmider, event abstraction in 
process mining: literature review and taxonomy, granular computing 6 (2020) 
719–736. 
[87] c. günther, a. rozinat, w.m.p. van der aalst, and k. van uden, ”monitoring 
deployed application usage with process mining, ” bpm reports, 2008. 
[88] s.n. araghi, f. fontanili, e. lamine, n. salatg ˘e, j. lesbegueries, s.r. pouyade, 
and f. b˘enaben, “evaluating the process capability ratio of patients ’ pathways by 
the application of process mining, spc and rtls ”, proceedings of the 12th 
international conference on health informatics (healthinf), vol. 5, pp. 
302–309, 2019. 
[89] z. valero-ramon, c. fern˘andez-llatas, b. valdivieso, v. traver, dynamic models 
supporting personalised chronic disease management through healthcare sensors 
with interactive process mining, sensors 20 (18) (2020) . 
[90] s. suriadi, r. mans, m.t. wynn, a. partington, j. karnon, measuring patient flow 
variations: a cross-organisational process mining approach, lecture notes in 
business information processing 181 (2014) 43–58. 
[91] j.t. marquinez, a. saur˘e, a. cataldo, j.-c. ferrer, identifying proactive icu 
patient admission, transfer and diversion policies in a public-private hospital 
network, eur. j. oper. res. 295 (2021) 306–320. 
[92] l. cao, data science: a comprehensive overview, acm computing surveys 
(csur) 50 (3) (2017) 1–42. 
[93] f. veit, j. geyer-klingeberg, j. madrzak, m. haug, j. thomson, the proactive 
insights engine: process mining meets machine learning and artificial 
intelligence, ceur workshop proceedings 1920 (2017) 1–5. 
[94] e. helm, a.m. lin, d. baumgartner, a.c. lin, j. küng, towards the use of 
standardized terms in clinical case studies for process mining in healthcare, 
international journal of environmental research and public health 17 (4) (2020) 
1348 . 
[95] m. arias, e. rojas, s. aguirre, f. cornejo, j. munoz-gama, m. sepúlveda, 
d. capurro, mapping the patient ’s journey in healthcare through process mining, 
international journal of environmental research and public health 17 (18) 
(2020) . 
[96] m. berghout, j. van exel, l. leensvaart, j.m. cramm, healthcare professionals ’ 
views on patient-centered care in hospitals, bmc health services research 15 (1) 
(2015) 1–13. 
[97] a.i. poon, j.j. sung, opening the black box of ai-medicine, j. gastroenterol. 
hepatol. 36 (3) (2021) 581–584. 
[98] m. jans, p. soffer, t. jouck, building a valuable event log for process mining: an 
experimental exploration of a guided process, enterprise information systems 13 
(5) (2019) 601–630. 
[99] c. fernandez-llatas, ed., interactive process mining in healthcare. springer 
international publishing, 2020. 
[100] a. latoszek-berendsen, h. tange, h. van den herik, a. hasman, from clinical 
practice guidelines to computer-interpretable guidelines, methods of information 
in medicine 49 (06) (2010) 550–570. 
[101] m. arias, e. rojas, j. munoz-gama, m. sepúlveda, a framework for 
recommending resource allocation based on process mining, lecture notes in 
business information processing 256 (2016) 458–470. 
[102] a. pika, m.t. wynn, s. budiono, a.h. ter hofstede, w.m.p. van der aalst, and h.a. 
reijers, ”privacy-preserving process mining in healthcare, ” international journal 
of environmental research and public health, vol. 17, no. 5, 2020. 
[103] c. safran, m. bloomrosen, w.e. hammond, s. labkoff, s. markel-fox, p.c. tang, 
d.e. detmer, toward a national framework for the secondary use of health data: 
an american medical informatics association white paper, j. am. med. inform. 
assoc. 14 (1) (2007) 1–9. 
[104] n. martin, j. bergs, patient flow data registration: a key barrier to the data-driven 
and proactive management of an emergency department, international 
emergency nursing 53 (2020) . 
[105] r.p.j.c. bose, r.s. mans, and w.m.p. van der aalst, “wanna improve process 
mining results?, ” proceedings of the ieee symposium on computational 
intelligence and data mining (cidm), pp. 127–134, 2013. 
[106] n. martin, “data quality in process mining, ” in interactive process mining in 
healthcare (c. fernandez-llatas, ed.), pp. 53–79, springer international 
publishing, 2021. 
[107] b. djulbegovic, g.h. guyatt, progress in evidence-based medicine: a quarter 
century on, the lancet 390 (10092) (2017) 415–423. 
[108] p. dimitri, “the evolution of evidence based clinical medicine, ” in practical 
pediatric urology (p. godbole and m. wilcox, d.t. adn koyle, eds.), pp. 1–15, 
cham: springer, 2021. 
[109] b.m. silva, j.j. rodrigues, i. de la torre díez, m. l˘opez-coronado, k. saleem, 
mobile-health: a review of current state in 2015, j. biomed. inform. 56 (2015) 
265–272. [110] c. rathert, m.d. wyrwich, s.a. boren, patient-centered care and outcomes: a 
systematic review of the literature, medical care research and review 70 (4) 
(2013) 351–379. 
[111] d. miller, c.s. gray, k. kuluski, c. cott, patient-centered care and patient- 
reported measures: let’s look before we leap, the patient-patient-centered 
outcomes research 8 (4) (2015) 293–299. 
[112] m.l. van eck, x. lu, s.j.j. leemans, w.m.p. van der aalst, pm2: a process mining 
project methodology, lect. notes comput. sci. 9097 (2015) 297–313. 
[113] s. aguirre, c. parra, m. sepúlveda, methodological proposal for process mining 
projects, international journal of business process integration and management 8 
(2) (2017) 102–113. 
[114] j.j. maldonado, r. palta, j. vazquez, j.l. bermeo, m. p˘erez-sanagustín, j. munoz- 
gama, exploring differences in how learners navigate in moocs based on self- 
regulated learning and learning styles: a process mining approach, in: 
proceedings of the latin american computing conference clei, 2016, pp. 1–12. 
[115] o.a. johnson, t.b. dhafari, a. kurniati, f. fox, e. rojas, the clearpath method 
for care pathway process mining and simulation, lecture notes in business 
information processing 342 (2018) 239–250. 
[116] ˘a. rebuge, d.r. ferreira, business process analysis in healthcare environments: a 
methodology based on process mining, information systems 37 (2) (2012) 
99–116. 
[117] e. rojas, m. sepúlveda, j. munoz-gama, d. capurro, v. traver, c. fernandez- 
llatas, question-driven methodology for analyzing emergency room processes 
using process mining, applied sciences 7 (3) (2017) 302. 
[118] a. rozinat, a.k.a. de medeiros, c.w. günther, a.j.m.m. weijters, w.m.p. van der 
aalst, the need for a process mining evaluation framework in research and 
practice, lect. notes comput. sci. 4928 (2007) 84–89. 
[119] m.j. page, j.e. mckenzie, p.m. bossuyt, i. boutron, t.c. hoffmann, c.d. mulrow, 
l. shamseer, j.m. tetzlaff, e.a. akl, s.e. brennan, r. chou, j. glanville, j. 
m. grimshaw, a. hr˘objartsson, m.m. lalu, t. li, e.w. loder, e. mayo-wilson, 
s. mcdonald, l.a. mcguinness, l.a. stewart, j. thomas, a.c. tricco, v.a. welch, 
p. whiting, d. moher, the prisma 2020 statement: an updated guideline for 
reporting systematic reviews, bmj 372 (2020) 2021 . 
[120] a.r.c. maita, l.c. martins, c.r. lopez paz, l. rafferty, p.c. hung, s.m. peres, 
m. fantinato, a systematic mapping study of process mining, enterprise 
information systems 12 (5) (2018) 505–549. 
[121] n. martin, b. depaire, a. caris, the use of process mining in business process 
simulation model construction, business & information systems engineering 58 
(1) (2016) 73–87. 
[122] a.e. m˘arquez-chamorro, m. resinas, a. ruiz-cort ˘es, predictive monitoring of 
business processes: a survey, ieee trans. serv. comput. 11 (6) (2018) 962–977. 
[123] w. chomyat and w. premchaiswadi, “process mining on medical treatment 
history using conformance checking, ” proceedings of the 14th international 
conference on ict and knowledge engineering (ict ke), pp. 77–83, 2016. 
[124] r. de la fuente, r. fuentes, j. munoz-gama, a. riquelme, f.r. altermatt, 
j. pedemonte, m. corvetto, m. sepúlveda, control-flow analysis of procedural 
skills competencies in medical training through process mining, postgrad. med. j. 
96 (1135) (2020) 250–256. 
[125] c. rinner, e. helm, r. dunkl, h. kittler, s. rinderle-ma, an application of process 
mining in the context of melanoma surveillance using time boxing, lecture notes 
in business information processing 342 (2018) 175–186. 
[126] m.r. dallagassa, c. dos santos garcia, e.e. scalabrin, s.o. ioshii, d.r. carvalho, 
opportunities and challenges for applying process mining in healthcare: a 
systematic mapping study, journal of ambient intelligence and humanized 
computing (2021) 1–18. 
[127] a. stefanini, d. aloini, e. benevento, r. dulmin, v. mininno, performance 
analysis in emergency departments: a data-driven approach, measuring business 
excellence 22 (2) (2018) 130–145. 
[128] a. stefanini, d. aloini, e. benevento, r. dulmin, v. mininno, a data-driven 
methodology for supporting resource planning of health services, socio-economic 
planning sciences 70 (2020) 100744 . 
[129] e. benevento, d. aloini, n. squicciarini, r. dulmin, v. mininno, queue-based 
features for dynamic waiting time prediction in emergency department, 
measuring business excellence 23 (4) (2019) 458–471. 
[130] r.p.j.c. bose, w.m.p. van der aalst, i. ¯zliobait le, m. pechenizkiy, handling 
concept drift in process mining, lect. notes comput. sci. 6741 (2011) 391–405. 
[131] a. maaradji, m. dumas, m. la rosa, a. ostovar, detecting sudden and gradual 
drifts in business processes from execution traces, ieee trans. knowl. data eng. 
29 (10) (2017) 2140 –2154 . 
[132] a. yeshchenko, c. di ciccio, j. mendling, a. polyvyanyy, comprehensive process 
drift detection with visual analytics, lect. notes comput. sci. 11788 (2019) 
119–135. 
[133] p. chibber, s.a. haq, i. ahmed, n.i. andrabi, g. singh, advances in the possible 
treatment of covid-19: a review, eur. j. pharmacol. 883 (2020) . 
[134] c.j. turner, a. tiwari, r. olaiya, y. xu, process mining: from theory to practice, 
business process management journal 18 (3) (2012) 493–512. 
[135] s.j. leemans, e. poppe, and m.t. wynn, ”directly follows-based process mining: 
exploration & a case study, ” proceedings of the international conference on 
process mining (icpm), vol. 25–32, 2019. 
[136] m. weske, business process management - concepts, languages, architectures, 
third edition, springer-verlag, berlin heidelberg, 2019 . 
[137] f. gonzalez-lopez, l. pufahl, j. munoz-gama, v. herskovic, m. sepúlveda, case 
model landscapes: toward an improved representation of knowledge-intensive 
processes using the fcm-language, software and systems modeling (2021) . 
[138] w.m.p. van der aalst, a practitioner ’s guide to process mining: limitations of the 
directly-follows graph, procedia computer science 164 (2019) 321–328. j. munoz-gama et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          journal of biomedical informatics 127 (2022) 103994
15[139] r. andrews, c. van dun, m. wynn, w. kratsch, m. roglinger, a. ter hofstede, 
quality-informed semi-automated event log generation for process mining, decis. 
support syst. 132 (2020) 113265 . 
[140] d.a. fischer, k. goel, r. andrews, c.g.j. van dun, m.t. wynn, m. roglinger, 
enhancing event log quality: detecting and quantifying timestamp imperfections, 
lect. notes comput. sci. 12168 (2020) 309–326. 
[141] n. martin, using indoor location system data to enhance the quality of healthcare 
event logs: opportunities and challenges, lecture notes in business information 
processing 342 (2019) 226–238. 
[142] s. suriadi, r. andrews, a.h. ter hofstede, m.t. wynn, event log imperfection 
patterns for process mining: towards a systematic approach to cleaning event logs, 
information systems 64 (2017) 132–150. 
[143] k. diba, k. batoulis, m. weidlich, m. weske, extraction, correlation, and 
abstraction of event data for process mining, wires data mining and knowledge 
discovery 10 (3) (2020) e1346 . 
[144] n. martin, a. martinez-millana, b. valdivieso, c. fern˘andez-llatas, interactive 
data cleaning for process mining: a case study of an outpatient clinic ’s 
appointment system, lecture notes in business information processing 362 
(2019) 532–544. 
[145] w.m.p. van der aalst, m. bichler, a. heinzl, responsible data science, business & 
information systems engineering 59 (5) (2017) 311–313. 
[146] w.m.p. van der aalst, a. adriansyah, a.k.a. de medeiros, f. arcieri, t. baier, 
t. blickle, r.p.j.c. bose, p. van den brand, r. brandtjen, j. buijs, a. burattin, 
j. carmona, et al., process mining manifesto, lecture notes in business 
information processing 99 (2012) 169–194. 
[147] m. rafiei, w.m.p. van der aalst, privacy-preserving data publishing in process 
mining, lecture notes in business information processing 392 (2020) 122–138. 
[148] s. nu nez von voigt, s.a. fahrenkrog-petersen, d. janssen, a. koschmider, f. 
tschorsch, f. mannhardt, o. landsiedel, and m. weidlich, “quantifying the re- 
identification risk of event logs for process mining, ” lecture notes in computer 
science, vol. 12127, pp. 252–267, 2020. 
[149] f. rapport, p. hibbert, m. baysari, j. long, r. seah, w. zheng, c. jones, k. preece, 
j. braithwaite, what do patients really want? an in-depth examination of patient 
experience in four australian hospitals, bmc health services research 19 (1) 
(2019) 1–9. 
[150] j.d. sonis, e.l. aaronson, r.y. lee, l.l. philpotts, b.a. white, emergency 
department patient experience: a systematic review of the literature, journal of 
patient experience 5 (2) (2018) 101–106. [151] j.s. mccullough, the adoption of hospital information systems, health econ. 17 
(5) (2008) 649–664. 
[152] p.l. reichertz, hospital information systems –past, present, future, int. j. med. 
informatics 75 (3–4) (2006) 282–299. 
[153] k.a. kuhn, d.a. giuse, from hospital information systems to health information 
systems-problems, challenges, perspectives, yearbook of medical informatics 10 
(1) (2001) 63–76. 
[154] m. dumas, j. recker, m. weske, management and engineering of process-aware 
information systems: introduction to the special issue, information systems 37 (2) 
(2012) 77–79. 
[155] m. dumas, w.m.p. van der aalst, and a.h.m. ter hofstede, eds., process-aware 
information systems: bridging people and software through process technology. 
wiley, 2005. 
[156] m.j. ball, hospital information systems: perspectives on problems and prospects, 
1979 and 2002, int. j. med. informatics 69 (2–3) (2003) 83–89. 
[157] m. reichert, b. weber, enabling flexibility in process-aware information systems: 
challenges, methods, technologies, springer-verlag, berlin heidelberg, 2012 . 
[158] w.m.p. van der aalst, m. rosemann, m. dumas, deadline-based escalation in 
process-aware information systems, decis. support syst. 43 (2) (2007) 492–511. 
[159] a. burattin, streaming process discovery and conformance checking, 
encyclopedia of big data technologies (2018) 1–8. 
[160] p. tarighi, s. eftekhari, m. chizari, m. sabernavaei, d. jafari, p. mirzabeigi, 
a review of potential suggested drugs for coronavirus disease (covid-19) 
treatment, eur. j. pharmacol. (2021) 173890 . 
[161] h.k. brittain, r. scott, e. thomas, the rise of the genome and personalised 
medicine, clinical medicine 17 (6) (2017) 545–551. 
[162] f. jiang, y. jiang, h. zhi, y. dong, h. li, s. ma, y. wang, q. dong, h. shen, 
y. wang, artificial intelligence in healthcare: past, present and future, stroke and 
vascular neurology 2 (4) (2017) 230–243. 
[163] n. jothi, w. husain, et al., data mining in healthcare –a review, procedia 
computer science 72 (2015) 306–313. 
[164] f. chen, p. deng, j. wan, d. zhang, a.v. vasilakos, x. rong, data mining for the 
internet of things: literature review and challenges, int. j. distrib. sens. netw. 11 
(8) (2015) . 
[165] g. manogaran, d. lopez, a survey of big data architectures and machine learning 
algorithms in healthcare, int. j. biomed. eng. technol. 25 (2–4) (2017) 182–211. 
[166] r. miotto, f. wang, s. wang, x. jiang, j.t. dudley, deep learning for healthcare: 
review, opportunities and challenges, briefings in bioinformatics 19 (6) (2017) 
1236 –1246 . j. munoz-gama et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
view publication stats