1
a computer science perspective
on digital transformation in production
philipp brauner, rwth aachen university, germany
manuela dalibor, rwth aachen university, germany
matthias jarke, rwth aachen university, germany and fraunhofer fit, germany
ike kunze, rwth aachen university, germany
istván koren∗,rwth aachen university, germany
gerhard lakemeyer, rwth aachen university, germany
martin liebenberg, rwth aachen university, germany
judith michael, rwth aachen university, germany
jan pennekamp, rwth aachen university, germany
christoph quix, fraunhofer fit, germany and hochschule niederrhein, germany
bernhard rumpe, rwth aachen university, germany
wil van der aalst, rwth aachen university, germany and fraunhofer fit, germany
klaus wehrle, rwth aachen university, germany
andreas wortmann, rwth aachen university, germany and university of stuttgart, germany
martina ziefle, rwth aachen university, germany
the industrial internet-of-things (iiot) promises significant improvements for the manufacturing industry by
facilitating the integration of manufacturing systems by digital twins. however, ecological and economic
demands also require a cross-domain linkage of multiple scientific perspectives from material sciences,
∗corresponding author
authors’ addresses: philipp brauner, brauner@comm.rwth-aachen.de, communication science, rwth aachen uni-
versity, aachen, germany; manuela dalibor, dalibor@se-rwth.de, software engineering, rwth aachen university,
aachen, germany; matthias jarke, jarke@dbis.rwth-aachen.de, databases and information systems, rwth aachen
university, aachen, germany and fraunhofer fit, sankt augustin, germany; ike kunze, ike.kunze@comsys.rwth-
aachen.de, communication and distributed systems, rwth aachen university, aachen, germany; istván koren,
koren@pads.rwth-aachen.de, process and data science, rwth aachen university, aachen, germany; gerhard lakemeyer,
gerhard@cs.rwth-aachen.de, knowledge-based systems group, rwth aachen university, aachen, germany; martin
liebenberg, liebenberg@kbsg.rwth-aachen.de, knowledge-based systems group, rwth aachen university, aachen,
germany; judith michael, michael@se-rwth.de, software engineering, rwth aachen university, aachen, germany;
jan pennekamp, jan.pennekamp@comsys.rwth-aachen.de, communication and distributed systems, rwth aachen
university, aachen, germany; christoph quix, christoph.quix@fit.fraunhofer.de, data science & artificial intelligence,
fraunhofer fit, sankt augustin, germany, christoph.quix@hs-niederrhein.de and hochschule niederrhein, krefeld, ger-
many; bernhard rumpe, rumpe@se-rwth.de, software engineering, rwth aachen university, aachen, germany; wil
van der aalst, vdaalst@pads.rwth-aachen.de, process and data science, rwth aachen university, aachen, germany and
fraunhofer fit, sankt augustin, germany; klaus wehrle, klaus.wehrle@comsys.rwth-aachen.de, communication and
distributed systems, rwth aachen university, aachen, germany; andreas wortmann, wortmann@se-rwth.de, software
engineering, rwth aachen university, aachen, germany, wortmann@isw.uni-stuttgart.de, institute for control engi-
neering of machine tools and manufacturing units (isw) and university of stuttgart, stuttgart, germany; martina ziefle,
ziefle@comm.rwth-aachen.de, communication science, rwth aachen university, aachen, germany.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted. to copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
©2021 copyright held by the owner/author(s). publication rights licensed to acm.
2577-6207/2021/1-art1 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3502265
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.
[bdj+22] p. brauner, m. dalibor, m. jarke, i. kunze, i. koren, g. lakemeyer, m. liebenberg, 
 j. michael, j. pennekamp, c. quix, b. rumpe, w. van der aalst, k. wehrle, a. wortmann, m. ziefle: 
a computer science perspective on digital transformation in production. 
in: acm trans. internet things, volume 3, pp. 1 - 32,  acm, februar 2022.  
https://www.se-rwth.de/publications/1:2 brauner et al.
engineering, operations, business, and ergonomics, as optimization opportunities can be derived from any
of these perspectives. to extend the iiot to a true internet of production , two concepts are required: first, a
complex, interrelated network of digital shadows which combine domain-specific models with data-driven ai
methods; and second, the integration of a large number of research labs, engineering and production sites as a
world wide lab which offers controlled exchange of selected, innovation-relevant data even across company
boundaries. in this paper, we define the underlying computer science challenges implied by these novel
concepts in four layers: smart human interfaces provide access to information that has been generated by
model-integrated ai . given the large variety of manufacturing data, new data modeling techniques should
enable efficient management of digital shadows, which is supported by an interconnected infrastructure . based
on a detailed analysis of these challenges, we derive a systematized research roadmap to to make the vision of
the internet of production a reality.
ccs concepts: •applied computing →engineering ;•computing methodologies →artificial intelli-
gence ;•human-centered computing →human computer interaction (hci) ;•information systems →
data management systems ;•networks→world wide web (network structure) ;•social and professional
topics→socio-technical systems ;•software and its engineering →software system structures .
additional key words and phrases: internet of production, world wide lab, digital shadows, industrial
internet of things
acm reference format:
philipp brauner, manuela dalibor, matthias jarke, ike kunze, istván koren, gerhard lakemeyer, martin
liebenberg, judith michael, jan pennekamp, christoph quix, bernhard rumpe, wil van der aalst, klaus wehrle,
andreas wortmann, and martina ziefle. 2021. a computer science perspective on digital transformation in
production. acm trans. internet things 1, 1, article 1 (january 2021), 31 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3502265
1 introduction
motivation and relevance. industry 4.0 is considered as the fourth industrial revolution focusing
on integrating cyber-physical production systems with processes and stakeholders across the
complete value-added chain. the term was announced in 2011 as part of the high-tech strategy
of the german federal ministry for education and research [ 26] and became an international
phenomenon reflected in the japanese industrial value chain initiative [ 71], the advanced man-
ufacturing initiative in the usa [ 108], the made in china 2025 strategy [ 101], the south korean
manufacturing 3.0 [72], and the uk catapult research center on high value manufacturing [30].
a central challenge in industry 4.0 is aggregating, abstracting, and analyzing the heterogeneous
data required to understand and optimize the processes at hand [ 35,57,140]. however, the required
data is often locked up in silos owned by different interdisciplinary stakeholders. apart from the
isolation of data within silos, utilizing information is traditionally limited to specific phases of the
product’s lifecycle, i.e., development, production, and usage. hence, the information carried by
these data is difficult to identify, interpret, and integrate, which prevents, for instance, using it for
cross-functional analytics, human-in-the-loop decision making, linkage of data with heterogeneous
semantics and structures, machine learning applications, or simple integrated visualization to
improve production processes. the semantic integration of this information is crucial to provide a
comprehensive picture to decision-makers across the value-added chain.
in this article, we introduce the unprecedented concept, challenges, and approaches of designing
theinternet of production (iop) [ 121] that builds on the ideas of the internet and the internet
of things (iot) to facilitate transparent interconnectivity of production systems. to extend the
industrial iot (iiot) and similar initiatives to a true internet of production , two concepts are required:
firstly, a complex, interrelated network of digital shadows, which combine domain-specific models
with focused data-driven ai methods inferred by autonomous agents; and second, the integration
of a large number of research labs, engineering and production sites as a world wide lab, which
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.a computer science perspective on digital transformation in production 1:3
offers controlled exchange of selected, innovation-relevant data even across company and national
boundaries. the iop intends to interconnect all production activities to unlock advances resulting
from information exchange and transfer of knowledge across the complete lifecycles of products,
processes, and resources. to this end, the iop provides models and interfaces to reliably integrate,
analyze, and use production data and information throughout time and space dimensions. it fosters
cross-domain collaboration on multiple levels, across stakeholders, ideally in real-time. as outlined,
these crucial challenges of the iop are not covered by today’s predominant iot approaches.
motivating example. we illustrate the advantages of the iop with the example of the ongoing
shift towards electric vehicles in the automotive industry, which is inherently characterized by
multi-causal uncertainties. while this evolving market is highly attractive for automotive man-
ufacturing companies, suppliers, and infrastructure providers, changing regulations, ambiguous
customer demands, and a stream of new technical developments require a rapid adaptation of
products and production processes [ 23,144]. today’s electric car models consist of a multitude
of components and materials, such as aluminum alloys and carbon composites, which must be
assembled according to the specifications of increasingly individual customer orders. each of
these materials and components is processed differently, requiring a high degree of flexibility
in the assembly line, the preceding supply chain, and the managing systems. these challenges
have to be addressed in short-term (e.g., machine configuration), medium-term (e.g., response
to customer demands), or long-term decisions (e.g., strategy for new model variants). rapid and
frequent changes hereby imply that the traditional differentiation of the product cycle into distinct
development, production, and usage phases is hardly possible, as the different phases are now
closely intertwined. therefore, the full benefits of the iop can only be realized if a data, service, and
analysis infrastructure is established that can provide the required information, which is necessary
to make the appropriate decisions. for example, necessary adaptations to the clearance of a car
door, based on customer feedback, imply changes in machine parameters and in the supply chain if
new materials are demanded. such a change may affect various stakeholders, e.g., designers, quality
managers, shop floor workers, factory planners, sales experts, logistics partners, or suppliers.
contributions. two essential concepts enable the iop: the world wide lab (wwl) and
digital shadows . (1) corresponding to the relationship of the internet and the world wide web
(www), we envision the world wide lab (wwl) as a core element and major application of the
iop. the wwl aims to be a network of multi-site labs in which models and data from experiments,
manufacturing and usage are made accessible even across company borders to gain additional
knowledge. this change will increase the productivity in a similar way as the www increased the
efficiency of e-commerce transactions, customer interactions, supply chain management, etc. (2) as
a main driver of the wwl, we leverage task- and context-dependent, purpose-driven, aggregated,
multi-perspective, and persistent datasets which we call digital shadows [92]. we postulate that
digital shadows are a suitable solution for production engineering applications, as multi-modal
views with task-specific granularity can provide high performance, low latency, security, and
privacy at the same time.
in this paper, we discuss the manifold research challenges towards an iop comprising a wwl
built on digital shadows from a computer science perspective. therefore, we augment current
research efforts in manufacturing with a dedicated analysis focusing on computer science challenges
and potential contributions towards the iop. thereby, we provide engineers with novel insights into
fundamental challenges that are related to data processing and information exchange that cross-
cut the various partial solutions towards integrated production. likewise, we provide computer
scientists with an analysis highlighting future interdisciplinary research directions to successfully
turn the ambitious digital transformation of production into reality.
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.1:4 brauner et al.
therefore, we distinguish four perspectives that address how data will be collected, processed,
and transmitted efficiently in the wwl:
(1)human-computer interaction plays a major role as the complex, heterogeneous, and inter-
connected information carried by data from production planning and operation has to be
presented in a meaningful way to decision-makers; their feedback needs to be collected in
smart user interfaces, integrated into the digital shadow, and used for production control.
(2)model-integrated artificial intelligence (ai) as synergy between data-driven ai methods
and model order reduction techniques from engineering must be considered to enrich data
semantically, to analyze it, to derive new insights, and to act appropriately in production.
(3)model-driven engineering is a quintessential prerequisite to relate data to knowledge made
explicit in heterogeneous models provided by different stakeholders and communicate it to
systems engineers, designers, suppliers, and others.
(4)aspects of network infrastructure, edge computing, and data management have to be ad-
dressed to provide an efficient basic infrastructure for data processing within the iop.
the holistic horizontal and vertical integration in the iop offers various tangible benefits to all
stakeholders in a production network – from companies in a value-added chain to the individual
machines and its operators: increased efficiency and closer integration through better exchange of
information between different, previously less integrated, stakeholders and thus higher resource
utilization, faster adjustments of the production to change, and less capital commitment. the
exploitation of data from the development, production, and usage cycle of products facilitate
optimization of future products and processes towards lower costs or capital commitment, higher
time, material, and energy efficiency, or higher product quality. further, cross-learning and semantic
knowledge about commonalities and differences between different materials, production processes,
and products and their interrelationships will contribute to a smarter production. to sum up, our
contributions to the iop from a computer science perspective are:
•the introduction of the concept of digital shadows as an enabler of the internet of production.
•the introduction of the concept of world wide labs to make knowledge globally accessible.
•a discussion of research challenges for the development of the internet of production.
•a set of strategic research directions for the internet of production.
paper organization. we present our approach to implement the iop. in the following, section 2
introduces the context of the iop, before section 3 explains the iop, and section 4 introduces digital
shadows. afterward, section 5 details our concept of the wwl, and section 6 discusses challenges
towards it. based on these insights, section 7 presents a strategic research roadmap and, finally,
section 8 concludes.
2 context
the differences between the terms production andmanufacturing are not clearly defined in
mechanical engineering. production is understood as “the conversion of inputs into finished
products” [ 60]. in the us perception [ 79], manufacturing is “a series of interrelated activities
and operations involving the design, material selection, planning, production, quality assurance,
management, and marketing of discrete consumer and durable goods” [ 60]. this definition assumes
that manufacturing is broader than production. however, production can also be understood as the
broader term including additional activities and operations [ 79] as, e.g., services can be produced
but not manufactured. we follow the latter idea and understand production as the wider term.
theinternet of production (iop) provides semantically adequate and context-aware data for
members of production companies and related fields whenever and wherever it is needed [ 121]. this
article focuses on technical requirements for realizing the iop from a computer science research
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.a computer science perspective on digital transformation in production 1:5
perspective . of course, the vision of the iop can only be successfully addressed, if the new concepts
and methods in information technology are applied in an integrated research agenda that also
includes new technologies for production engineering. we are part of a research cluster with an
extraordinary breadth of more than 30 co-located contributing institutes from different disciplines,
such as computer science, engineering, material science, economics, and social-sciences, as well as
over 50 industrial partners, such as robert bosch gmbh, samsung electronics co. ltd and siemens
ag corporate technology (cf. https://iop.rwth-aachen.de/). we have a holistic perspective on
tomorrow’s production and also address, e.g., new material compositions for additive manufacturing,
the economic perspective of platforms for sharing data between different stakeholders [ 83], and
also ethical implications of our work. we aim at applying the principles inherent to the internet,
such as openness, world-wide access, and community-driven standards to the iop to achieve a
sustainable and effective digital transformation.
2.1 digital twins vs. digital shadow
to realize the iop, we suggest digital twins , which digitally represent material [ 15,24] and
immaterial [ 85,95] objects and processes of the real world. the challenge here is the integration of
the different levels of scale (temporal, spatial, etc.) of the numerous underlying processes, yielding
large amounts of data, ill-fitted models, and high latencies if data needs to be aggregated and
analyzed. there exist various platforms and approaches to realize digital twins [ 8,77,94,106,143]
or to establish the connection between iot and digital twins, e.g., model-driven approaches for
interface generation [ 81] or the h2020 funded iotwins innovation action project [ 11], which aims
to design a reference architecture for distributed and edge-enabled twins and its evaluation in
several industrial test beds.
wedo not consider a complete digital twin to be feasible due to the massive amounts of data that
a virtual replica of a product, machine, or production plant would require. also, the digital twins
that are used in practice are not complete digital counterparts of physical objects; rather, they are
collections of different datasets and models, each representing a particular aspect of the real object.
the datasets are collected for a specific purpose, e.g., sensor data for prediction, cad models for
simulation. to model this scenario more exactly, our vision focuses on digital shadows , which we
consider as task- and context-dependent, purpose-driven, aggregated, and persistent datasets that
encompass a complex reality from multiple perspectives in a more compact fashion and with better
performance than a fully integrated digital twin (cf. section 4). a digital shadow can be compared
to a view in database systems: an aggregated subset of the data of the real object, computed by a
complex function that might include complex algorithms for data reduction and analysis.
we have already proposed a conceptual model [ 10] to describe digital shadows and demonstrate it
using a concrete example. the conceptual model was established through interdisciplinary research
and intensive discussions and was evaluated in various real-world manufacturing scenarios. it is a
foundation to manage complexity, automated analyses, and syntheses, and, ultimately, facilitates
cross-domain collaboration. for a better understanding on how digital shadows could be used
within digital twins, we refer the reader to a dedicated example [22].
2.2 comparison to state-of-the-art
in comparison to existing approaches, the internet of production provides a holistic, cross-domain,
and collaborative perspective on manufacturing processes. existing approaches can be categorized
into the following areas: concrete technologies such as the classical internet, cloud manufacturing
and industrial iot, business demonstrators and digital transformation strategies such as service-
oriented manufacturing approaches, digital manufacturing or the global lighthouse network, and
politically and funding-driven approaches such as industry 4.0 and other national initiatives.
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.1:6 brauner et al.
in comparison to the classical internet , the iop offers more functionality to a restricted
group of stakeholders. it grants access to world-wide production-focused knowledge bases, pro-
vides aggregated and semantically enriched data from production processes, includes intelligent
algorithms and functionalities to support question-solving, and enables users to analyze their
own data. these functionalities are available to all stakeholders within production processes, such
as employees of different companies of the production network within all levels of work, e.g.,
the workforce, the quality assurance team, marketing experts, production planning, suppliers, or
logistics partners.
certainly, comparing the iop to the classical internet is a fitting analogy given that the internet
itself started as a lab of labs, an aspect that the iop, in turn, picks up with the concept of the
world wide lab. moreover, today, the classical internet serves as an archetype: it revolutionized
networking with its novel idea of packet switching. other approaches followed up on this idea.
for example, in the domain of logistics, the concept of the physical internet [ 7,109] also relies on
the internet analogy, envisioning to establish a physical form of “packet” switching in logistics.
in contrast to the physical internet with its cargo and product flows, the internet of production
itself intends to establish a “knowledge” switching for the manufacturing industry by sourcing
information and digital shadows from various stakeholders and across domains, with the goal of a
sustainable and effective digital transformation.
in relationship to industry 4.0 , theinternet of production can be seen as a concrete initiative
to realize aspects of these strategies in cooperation between research and industry. this includes the
integration of digitized cyber-physical production systems with their processes and stakeholders to
optimize the complete value-added chain. however, this idea is also relevant internationally within
the us advanced manufacturing initiative [ 108], the chinese made in china 2025 strategy [ 101],
the japanese industrial value chain initiative [71], the south korean manufacturing 3.0 [72], and
the uk national catapult research center on high value manufacturing [30].
theglobal lighthouse network [151] is an initiative of the world economic forum. the
initiative was launched because of the global manufacturing industry’s lag in adopting industry 4.0
technologies. it has essentially the same goals as the iop, i.e. namely a move toward globally
networked production. however, it focuses more on the management perspective, whereas the iop
develops the necessary technical foundations to achieve this goal.
approaches such as digital manufacturing [107] as part of the fourth industrial revo-
lution [136] refer to the digital transformation of production processes using smart and agile
manufacturing and smart factories together with digital manufacturing technologies such as ad-
ditive manufacturing (3d printing), laser cutting, and cnc processes. in contrast, the iop has no
limit regarding specific manufacturing technologies, and integrates the whole value chain.
iop and industrial iot. general efforts, such as the industrial iot or industry 4.0, typically
focus on enabling communication only within the same company [ 36]. in contrast, our vision of the
internet of production does not merely intend to enable communication between different companies,
but also aims to realize a new level of cross-domain collaboration by enabling the exchange of
semantically adequate and context-aware data whenever and wherever it is needed [121].
cloud manufacturing is “a service-oriented business model to share manufacturing capabilities
and resources on a cloud platform” [ 48], which encapsulates distributed resources into cloud
services, and allows for their integrated management [ 153]. according to siderska and jadaan [ 139],
cloud manufacturing focuses on inter-factory integration, whereas industry 4.0 also considers
intra-factory integration. the iop shares the industry 4.0 idea of intra-factory and inter-factory
integration and it does not restrict its technological approach to only one technology such as cloud
applications [ 48], and service-oriented architectures [ 134]. cloud manufacturing platforms can be
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.a computer science perspective on digital transformation in production 1:7
built for small-medium size enterprises or group enterprises [ 97]. in contrast to that, the internet
of production is not limited to one enterprise or a group of enterprises.
service-oriented manufacturing integrates services and physical products into one product
service system and companies involved focus typically on a specific sector [ 53]. research in this
area focuses on the business perspective and pricing strategies [ 154], not the technological and
computer science perspective.
in summary, there are already approaches towards the digital transformation of production.
they either focus on singular aspects of digital production, take a management perspective without
sufficiently resolving the technical challenges, or lack strategies to enable collaboration across
company boundaries. as outlined in the next sections, the internet of production integrates these
different approaches holistically and provides concepts and method to achieve this ambitious goal.
general challenges that the aforementioned global initiatives are proposing to solve by in-
tegrating manufacturing and it are of societal and political nature. the proposed solutions have
partially overlapping issues, but each also has its strategic foci and thus associated challenges, some
of which we outline here. digital manufacturing, which aims to integrate digital manufacturing
methods into production processes, leads to typical issues in human-robot collaboration like unfore-
seen events that robots cannot handle [ 107]. data availability for monitoring and control, as well as
its management and networking are further challenges. cloud manufacturing leads to two major
challenges [ 139]: first, general integration issues of cloud computing, iot, and high-performance
computing exist. second, technical issues such as cloud management engines and visualization in
cloud environments surface. for service-oriented manufacturing, gao et al. [ 53] discuss challenges
in the cooperation between businesses and adaptations of business models for outsourcing parts
of the value chain as services. they see service-oriented manufacturing as “innovation from the
perspectives of business model, industry insight, and technology advantages”.
in section 6, we specifically describe the challenges involved in realizing the internet of produc-
tion. we categorize these into four layers. in the outlook, we point out challenges that go beyond
these layers, such as implications for business models.
3 vision of the internet of production (iop)
modern production environments are characterized by highly complex processes and dependencies
along the complete production chain [ 122]. consequently, optimizing the overall production requires
a performant communication and collaboration not only between different factories of the same
company, but also across company boundaries, as otherwise, changes made by one supplier could
have negative effects on other companies in the production chain [ 147]. rolled out to all stages
of the production chain, the iop would, e.g., allow for faster development cycles, as implications
of new design changes can be populated along the overall production chain more easily. beyond,
we identify the main potential of the iop in the world wide lab (wwl), which combines the
information of hundreds to thousands of (different) processes into one huge (virtual) setting.
establishing and utilizing a world-wide knowledge base. the resulting world-wide knowl-
edge base consequently enables the usage of data-intensive approaches, such as machine learning,
to generate purpose-driven digital shadows incorporating deep production knowledge for op-
timizing processes, efficiently developing new products, or predicting their life span. in today’s
production landscape, such approaches are not feasible due to the scarcity of available data and the
large possible parameter space. this problem is even more pronounced in new production sectors,
such as the aforementioned electric vehicle industry, as well as for newly founded companies that
do not have a large pool of information. a newly founded electric car manufacturer, for example,
would not have many benchmarking opportunities yet many options to innovate. using the wwl,
the manufacturer could now link the current state of its production processes to processes running
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.1:8 brauner et al.
internet of production
optimize production quality, keep material properties
actions myfactorydashboard consultexternalbestpractices semanticknowledgebase
explanation
lessmaterialremovalyields
higherqualityinyourmilling
process.butprocessingtime
andcostswillincrease.
readmore...context
acmeinc.implementedthis
strategysuccessfully. energy
speed
trainingproposed changes
projectionbasedonyour
livedata.readmore...
apply
fig. 1. a mockup of a search engine for production queries leveraging the (global) knowledge base processed
by intelligent agents to optimize production processes, as envisioned by the internet of production (iop).
in factories of other companies (competitors, suppliers, customers) or also experiments at universi-
ties [ 122] to explore new process improvements. some of these improvements can be implemented
automatically, especially since the concepts originating from the broader context of iiot, industry
4.0, and the iop enable wide-spread factory automation and reconfiguration [ 149]. yet, uncalled-for
automation limits the optimization of production and processes [ 137], which is why the impact of
human workers should not be underestimated.
access to iop-enabled knowledge. acknowledging the prominent position of workers and
decision-makers in socio-technical systems, we thus put the human at the top of the iop and
do not aim for fully automated production. consequently, it is important to provide task- and
user-centered interfaces to make it easier for human engineers and workers to access the available
information and support them in design, manufacturing, and management tasks. one possible
interface could be modeled after popular web search engines where users can perform queries
to find the desired information. based on such production queries , data from several, potentially
external, sources need to be integrated, semantically enriched, analyzed, and visualized. in the
context of the mentioned car manufacturer, operators might ask, e.g., how to optimize production
quality while keeping material properties. figure 1 illustrates our concept using this query. based
on contextual data, e.g., previous queries, the user interface can reference the current material
composition and suggest actions. intelligent software agents [ 131] behind this interface collect
relevant information from the wwl and subsequently analyze the influence of changes in material
composition on production as a whole. the data hereby have to be retrieved from various sources
maintained by different stakeholders. access to the data is thus enabled by the wwl. the changes
could, e.g., plot a projection of the overall quality of the production. the effects are visually enriched
so that the user can understand them more easily. the querying actor could then use the provided
information for management decisions regarding changes to the material composition. proposed
changes could be directly applied from within the search user interface.
establishing the internet of production. smart human interfaces are an important compo-
nent of our envisioned technology stack to enable the iop, as illustrated on the left side of figure 2.
more specifically, task- and user-centered interfaces are required to facilitate the access of human
engineers and workers to the newly gained information. gathering the corresponding context- and
task-specific information itself requires a sophisticated underlying infrastructure. model-integrated
artificial intelligence composes the information in human-understandable form by means of models
from different domains combined with ai on the basis of data abstractions and aggregations, which
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.a computer science perspective on digital transformation in production 1:9
analytics
virtual worldphysical worldusageproductiondevelopmentraw datadigitalshadowsuser interfacesdata abstraction, aggregation, and refinementthe digital shadow facilitates task-specific analysis for (sec. 4) mid-term analysis(e.g., shop floor optimization)ad-hoc analysis(e.g., tool optimization)
data modelingenables abstraction and aggregation of data (sec. 6.3)interconnected infrastructureprovides basis for data retrieval (sec. 6.4)model-integrated aicreates and operates on digital shadows (sec. 6.2)smart human interfacesenables task-, context-and user-adaptive interactions (sec. 6.1)long-term analysis(e.g., value stream optimization)world widelab
world widelab aggregation across multiple sites and products exploit vast number of accessible field data and regard every operation as a potential experiment in a “lab of labs” (sec. 5).
fig. 2. in the internet of production (iop), task-adaptive digital shadows build on interconnected infras-
tructure, data modeling, and model-integrated artificial intelligence to provide smart interfaces that make
the right data actionable at the right time during development, production, and usage. integration across
different production facilities and locations leads to the world wide lab.
are, in turn, maintained by data modeling techniques which themselves need an interconnected
infrastructure that retrieves and integrates data. besides the challenges and benefits from an engi-
neering point of view, each of these four layers poses several challenges that are highly relevant
from a computer science perspective and that need to be solved on the way to realizing our vision.
smart human interfaces. as illustrated above, making it easy for human users like production
managers and shop floor operators to formulate their problems without the necessity of complicated
programming languages requires smart human interfaces. solutions should be provided in forms
that are easy to understand and learn in a micro-learning style [ 84], so that the human engineer can
take appropriate actions to implement them and consequently achieve a real improvement of the
production process. what makes this challenging is the volume and diversity of information that
needs to be presented: apart from information about material, product, and process optimizations
derived from continuous data analysis, we also envision integrating new data from the wwl
whenever they are available. additionally, the current state of the production has to be accounted
for, as well as specific input by operators regarding their needs and problems. thus, the interfaces
have to be able to present a diverse set of information to the human workers.
model-integrated artificial intelligence. based on novel combinations of mathematical models,
simulations, and data-driven artificial intelligence, information is gathered from different entities
in the wwl, data is aggregated from various sources, digital shadows are built [ 92,103], and
answers to user queries are computed. the implementation of intelligent software agents enables
model-integrated ai, meaning various techniques of ai, e.g., knowledge-based systems, machine
learning, or data mining, in synergy with engineering models to give answers for specific purposes
in production scenarios. the challenges lie in the networking of such agents in the wwl, and the
integration of different ai approaches to provide trustworthy aids for manufacturing.
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.1:10 brauner et al.
data modeling. furthermore, sophisticated data modeling techniques are required to model the
digital shadow, i.e., the heterogeneous datasets originating from different production processes.
the data models need to be tightly connected to the engineering models of the machines on the
shop floor, as their setup determines the type and structure of the data to be collected. thus, in
addition to describing the static aspects (e.g., schema, provenance, quality), the ability to derive the
data models from the engineering models by applying model transformations must be considered.
interconnected infrastructure. an interconnected infrastructure for the wwl is challenged by
increasingly high data rates in the manufacturing industry, where sensors can generate data in
the range of giga- to petabytes per second [ 55]. these data rates are problematic for storage and
semantic analysis in real-time, as well as for sending these vast amounts of data within the wwl.
therefore, data has to be aggregated and reduced in a semantically meaningful way to still enable
purpose-driven, meaningfully abstracted and aggregated, temporal data subsets. for this, model
and data reduction techniques have to be applied, e.g., in the form of edge computing or in-network
processing, to process the data as early as possible in the wwl.
organizational challenges. in addition to the requirements of the various layers of the iop, some
general issues also apply to several layers. the stakeholders of the wwl need to establish a level
of trust between each other, so that data can be shared [ 32,52]. then, a platform with standardized
interfaces can be established that provides the technological basis for data exchange. for example,
the international data spaces association [ 111,112] currently develop a platform for secure, trusted,
and reliable data exchange while also guaranteeing the data sovereignty of the data providers. we
plan to apply some key aspects of this platform in the iop [ 73]. when considering the individual
local production sites, safety and security aspects play a crucial role as well [ 63] because a minimum
of guarantees must be in place to ensure a smooth and uneventful operation of the wwl.
summarizing, our vision of the iop addresses the idea of exchanging data on a global level and
using this data to provide task-specific information whenever and wherever needed. consequently,
the form of data representation used in the iop is a key concept of our vision. in the following, we
present how we utilize digital shadows to realize our envisioned cross-domain collaboration.
4 digital shadows enable the internet of production
our vision of the iop demands that the right information is available at the right time, depending
on the task and context. such information includes data from the production systems and pro-
cesses, shop floor workers, customers, suppliers, and many other sources, which allow optimizing
production, reduce downtimes, and save resources [ 152]. figure 2 shows the stepwise construction,
refinement, and application of digital shadows. at the bottom layer, physical and virtual production
steps produce raw data that characterize the product, the process, and the resources. due to the
volume, variety, and velocity of data, retrieving the right information from the data is figuratively
like searching for a needle in a haystack. hence, these data need to be abstracted and aggregated to
support meaningful decision-making at different levels and scopes, from real-time machine and
process optimizations to long-term strategic planning. an interconnected infrastructure, including
additional metadata characterizing data points and facilitating remote access, builds the basis for
data aggregation. data models provide structural information about the available data and thus
enable knowledge gain via purposeful connection of data points. by applying ai methods, such as
machine learning or process mining [ 145], we can attain further knowledge from the available data,
e.g., quality predictions or bottlenecks in assembly lines. human interfaces support decision making,
process optimization, error avoidance, and thus improve production performance by providing user-
and target-specific digital shadows. they also facilitate human interaction with the cyber-physical
production system (cpps) and allow for analytics and ai methods creating digital shadows.
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.a computer science perspective on digital transformation in production 1:11
concept for digital shadow
metadata
 data
 model
refines with 
detailed modelsupdates with additional data
derives, combines and aggregatescombines 
and aggregates
digital shadow
metadata
 data
 model
digital shadow
metadata
 data model
digital shadow
metadata
 data model
digital shadow
fig. 3. beyond data, digital shadows contain models and metadata that provide insight into the data’s
context, traces, and interdependencies.
digital shadows are sets of contextual data traces or their aggregation and abstraction collected
from a system or mockup, such that they help to fulfill a specific purpose with respect to the
original system. they are comprised of data, metadata, and models.
digital shadows are created on the fly to be semantically sufficiently correct for their specific
purpose. to this effect, they are generated by the application of data analytics and reduced en-
gineering models. the former translate data (in real time) to information (possibly by involving
machine learning algorithms), the latter enable relating that information and giving semantics
(meaning) in the context of the purpose, e.g., the production system or process the information
was produced from. consequently, digital shadows may contain (parts of) engineering models,
simulation models, or other models of the system whose part or activity they represent. under-
standing digital shadows as interfaces for production services enables re-using these services with
refined or abstracted digital shadows for subsequent tasks. thereby, digital shadows continuously
improve with their usage, since the underlying production models are validated and extended
with each additional application. digital shadows benefit from interconnected production plants
because they can access and be composed of more data from different data sources. with more data
available, they can become more meaningful and thus more effective in supporting automation.
the technical realization of a digital shadow potentially includes different pieces of information
but should at least contain (i) the data (or an abstraction thereof) collected in the monitoring
period; (ii) metadata, such as period of time, the sensors used, the sampling frequency, potential
uncertainties, information about the state of the system during operation (if that is not part of
the sensed data), the intention of the measurement, who was involved, etc.; and (iii) contextual
data, such as references to the engineering model (e.g., cad, simulink, sysml, or uml) of the
observed system or process, for instance, describing, where sensors are attached to and thus where
measurements are taken from. a digital shadow includes the information on how it has been
computed as metadata; thus, we know about the constraints and limitations of the dataset. this
information is crucial when examining the data quality of a digital shadow, i.e., by changing the
function that produces the digital shadow, we can improve its data quality.
figure 3 shows the components of digital shadows: models, data, and metadata. we refer the
reader to our work [ 10] for details on the conceptual model of digital shadows. digital shadows
refine other digital shadows by providing more detailed models, by adding up-to-date data, by
deriving new digital shadows using ai methods, or by combining the information contained in
other digital shadows into a new digital shadow. individual digital shadows not only serve to
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.1:12 brauner et al.
control individual production processes, but can be linked together within or across companies.
combining digital shadows across different processes and companies to a world wide lab delivers
added value by providing more information that can reveal additional insights on the production,
identifying correlations of subsequent process steps or actors along the value chain, as well as
transferring of recognized patterns to similar but new processes.
5 establishing the world wide lab (wwl): making knowledge
globally accessible
digital shadows are an important aspect when capturing information that was generated as part of
the iop. to realize the main application of the internet of production (cf. section 1), research must
also focus on open aspects of the envisioned wwl, i.e., how to securely realize the exchange of
knowledge across different stakeholders to enable approaches like transfer learning. the wwl
complements digital shadows by offering stakeholders the ability to reliably collaborate in an
industrial setting and, ultimately, to improve their existing digital shadows, thus tapping into
currently unrealized potentials.
world wide lab (wwl). the world wide lab connects all (existing) data sources in a globally
interconnected system and makes them available across company borders to foster a transfer of
knowledge and to fuel innovation. to this end, available information is re-used across all phases
of the product cycle, i.e., development, production, and usage. the wwl is not fixed to a single
architecture or set of stakeholders. these decisions are use case-specific.
the term wwl is chosen as an analogy to the www as the envisioned wwl should also provide
(unstructured) information in a large-scale system that is maintained by multiple (distrusting)
stakeholders in a similar way as the internet. naturally, such a setting also requires in-depth
analyses of the underlying security principles and privacy needs to make sure that the new types of
dataflows [ 122] and data sharing concepts are implemented securely [ 120]. we envision combining
data sources from different production sites, supply chains, data lakes, and cyber-physical systems
(cpss). thus, we make information, potentially provided by competitors, available across company
borders to eventually make it accessible within an established world wide lab. this change in
boundaries enables companies to improve their decision-making by combining data sources and
digital shadows on a larger scale [ 121]. for instance, comparative process mining using process
cubes [146] allows informed decisions by comparing different processes and their properties.
the need for (data) security and safety. traditionally, companies in the production domain
are cautious when sharing data to prevent any leakage of sensitive information [ 110]. hence, the
transition from today’s local data silos to a globally accessible knowledge base [ 122] is a significant
challenge as valuable intellectual property must be protected accordingly. similarly, even less
sensitive data, such as shipment information, might already expose business relationships to the
public. consequently, the identity of involved companies should be concealed through technical
means whenever practical [ 64]. in addition to data security, safety aspects are relevant as data
sharing can have a direct impact on the environment, involved workforce, and the local production
site [ 63]. safety is paramount when using foreign data, as, e.g., incorrect parameter settings applied
to a machine can cause physical damage and, even worse, harm to humans. here, especially, network
security policies should be revised to account for the shift from isolated production networks to the
global world wide lab [ 63,120]. simultaneously, improvements in this area can also mitigate the
individual risks of data leakage. overall, (data) security and safety are fundamental for the wwl.
integrating data sources into the wwl. given that a variety of different systems must
be integrated, the required changes to shape the manufacturing industry to the wwl affect
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.a computer science perspective on digital transformation in production 1:13
different areas of today’s production. in production cells , the gathering and sharing of process data
of individual cpss and production processes must be dealt with. concerning our exemplary car
manufacturer, this view corresponds to information about a single assembly step in production.
on the shop floor , the digital shadows of different production cells can be combined for a single
production site. w.r.t. to our example, the data collected here refers to all local production steps and
their (inter)connections. finally, on the wwl layer , data and knowledge of different production sites,
potentially even across domains [ 147], should be available for companies in the wwl [ 57]. here,
data sources are not limited to companies along a single supply chain. instead, we also encourage
an exchange of information across supply chains to maximize the improvements resulting from
exchanged information. a recent survey [ 155] underlines that even the usually considered scenario
of smart supply chains is not yet put into practice. to conclude, data sources from different areas in
manufacturing, i.e., production cells, shop floors, and the wwl layer, have to be accessible within
the wwl to provide the needed information and variety.
as highlighted before (cf. section 3), all available data is part of the current state of knowledge,
which is not in a fixed state, but in continuous change, as new process information and data ideally
help to improve the existing shadows [ 57]. the car factory could, for example, retrieve machine
parameters gathered in a different setting (by another stakeholder) to react to changes in the
hardness of the delivered steel. overall, reaching decisions is more efficient and reliable with the
wwl because all globally available knowledge is incorporated into the decision-making process.
estimating the impact of the wwl. the fully developed and interconnected wwl serves as
the ideal real-world application of the concept of the internet of production: a globally accessible
knowledge base that combines the information of numerous data sources. without further research,
we are unable to fully tap into the expected potentials. in line with the advances made by large
standardization projects, such as gaia-x [ 18] or the international data spaces (ids) [ 111,112], we
realized first prototypes of the wwl to showcase its potential to companies. for example, beyond
our formalization on data interoperability [ 57], we already provide insights into the accountable
and reliable data sharing in supply chains [ 5,117,118]. while research traditionally focuses on data
sharing along the supply chain, we also particularly explore the data sharing across supply chains,
and especially when trust relationships are missing [ 123]. for example, we revisited the privacy
needs in company benchmarking across supply chains and discovered that existing work does
not account for the sensitivity of the complex computations of key performance indicators [ 124].
using readily-available building blocks from confidential computing, we demonstrate that secure
approaches are feasible [ 124] and serve as candidates for real-world use in industry and the wwl.
regarding the sharing of production parameters and associated experiences, we analyzed the
industry needs when commissioning new production lines and correspondingly developed an
oblivious exchange platform to facilitate such information sharing [ 119]. again, we rely on well-
known concepts from confidential computing to ensure security and real-world deployability in
the wwl. with two distinct use cases (injection molding and machine tools), we showcase our
platform’s universality, i.e., our work is not bound to a specific use case. to conclude, our work
proves that turning the wwl into reality is possible with concepts from confidential computing.
additional research is needed to transform novel applications into secure, reliable services in the
wwl, which are then re-usable across different domains.
an outlook into tomorrow’s wwl. in particular, we identify a significant need for future
research (also concerning readily-available building blocks) in the area of (federated) privacy-
preserving machine learning. we expect the wwl to enable such applications on a large scale
and thus be a source of advancements. for example, when high-pressure die casting parts for cars,
machine learning-based quality prediction allows discovering defects even when in-situ methods
are not applicable. enriching the input data with external data would significantly improve the
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.1:14 brauner et al.
prediction results, allow for properly configured production lines, and thereby reduce scrap rates.
especially when directly feeding information into live processes, safety needs must be considered
in light of external knowledge sources with its diverse stakeholders. naturally, more in-depth
collaborations, data exchanges, and novel, currently unexplored use cases and applications will
emerge once first experiences have been made [ 122]: both the perceived advantages and a decrease
in reservation against data sharing due to the fear of data leakage will accelerate this development.
for now, our work showcases the wwl’s potentials, and our findings contribute to standardization
efforts, such as gaia-x or the ids, that will eventually manifest the wwl in practice.
in the following, we first mention challenges for the wwl, highlight the progress that has
already been made, and then formulate necessary further research directions.
6 setting the stage for the internet of production
the last two sections laid out the methodological foundation of our approach of the iop. digital
shadows provide purpose-driven collections of data, facilitating data-driven decisions. the wwl
connects these digital shadows in a global network, paralleling the idea of the web as the prime
application of the internet. by establishing an interconnected knowledge base consisting of data
sources from various companies, we achieve massive economies of scale, thus increasing the overall
benefits. however, to the same extent, we enable several new hurdles that need to be tackled. in
the following, we examine these challenges using the top-down layered model shown on the left in
figure 2. for each layer, we highlight research that has already been started to address these issues.
we will point the reader to other publications by the authors in which more concrete research
results are reported, such as the usage of digital shadows in process mining [ 22] or adaptation of
the production system to the capabilities of the worker [102].
6.1 humane interfaces for interacting with digital shadows
the new possibilities of the internet of production have given rise to new questions in the area of
designing the interfaces between the human actors and the iop that have so far been insufficiently
addressed in current research [ 78]. on the one hand, more and smarter automation raises the
question of responsibility and control [ 93,133], and on the other hand, new forms of hybrid
intelligence as the collaboration between human operators and the iop must be designed that
harness the potentials of both artificial and human intelligence [44, 89].
despite the obvious potential of increasingly automated production control through iop-based
digital shadows, people will remain an integral component of socio-technical production systems
(stps) [ 50,78]: either as certain tasks cannot be fully automated for technical, legal, or ethical
constraints, because of a shift from manual activities to monitoring and planning tasks, or as a final
arbitrator when automated systems fail or come into conflict [150].
however, reliable automation leads to the automation conundrum [46]: the more systems are
automated, and the higher the performance of the automation, the lower the supervisors’ situational
awareness and the more difficult supervision, intervention, or manual control becomes. thus,
several challenges need to be addressed to support operators’ interaction with digital shadow-
based automation at all company levels (e.g., shop floor operation, factory planning, supply chain
management, and strategic planning):
transparent automation and meaningful control. operators’ and decision makers’ process
knowledge and understanding deteriorate through abstraction and automation [ 6,9,46,150].
however, this situational awareness is crucial should automation fail, to evaluate the functioning
of an automated system, or to handle unmodeled situations (out-of-the-loop loss of situational
awareness). consequently, a challenge is to design simple interfaces to automated processes and
decision-support systems that are accessible, transparent, and easy to learn and use.
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.a computer science perspective on digital transformation in production 1:15
although one of our intended interfaces is as simple as an internet search engine (cf. figure 1),
processing these queries is more sophisticated than a simple keyword search. as users should not
need deep technical knowledge about the underlying system, autonomous agents interacting on
the wwl can provide this semantic information implicitly. for example, when inquiring about the
ideal type of an electric car battery, the planned production method or driving safety is considered
implicitly. other forms of automation can draw on transparent explanatory approaches so that
the basis for the system’s decisions can be interpreted, understood, and corrected if necessary. an
emerging research field to increase usability and comprehensibility of models is explainable ai [ 4],
whose approaches and methods must be adapted to the specific use cases of the production domain.
modeling of tacit knowledge. a further challenge is the utilization of human expertise
through automated systems. most machine learning approaches require representations of human
knowledge to create digital models of product and production planning, as well as production and
usage. in some cases, the description of this knowledge is simple and often already exists (e.g.,
image classification for online quality control, if quality can be measured easily). in other cases, a
representation of the expert knowledge is necessary, but this tacit knowledge is difficult to verbalize
and hidden in unconscious evaluations and motor memory [ 126]. consequently, it is difficult to
communicate this knowledge and expertise to others and other domains, to record and describe
this knowledge digitally, and to use sparse data to train ai algorithms [89].
bias-free interaction with automated systems. trust, reliance, and trustworthiness is a
crucial prerequisite for acceptance and use of automation in production and other domains [ 65].
adequate and meaningful useof automation by operators must be carefully balanced between disuse
(intentional neglect of decision aids, either due to missing trust or missing perceived benefits) and
misuse (over-utilization of automation by over-trust and neglecting to check its results) [ 65,114].
this fine balance relates to automation biases and automation complacency, and sound systems
design helps [ 19,58]: if automated systems are designed right, operators have more capacity to
detect malfunctioning automation and to handle exceptions.
context- and user-centered interfaces. third, a challenge is to make the vast amount of
heterogeneous information from the iop transparent and accessible through user-, context-, and
task-dependent interfaces [ 1,29]. again, the design of stpss and interface usability are important
factors, as good interfaces facilitate the understanding of the systems’ status and functioning, lower
cognitive load, enable successful operation, and offer insights on further optimizations. further, we
need a “natural and trusted” communicative etiquette for enabling a close and trusted collaboration
between the operators and the ai-based systems. for this, understanding the operators’ basic
emotional needs as well as their mental models of and general attitudes towards these highly
complex systems is of importance. further, the demographic shift and changes in the workforce
pose further challenges, as user interfaces and support systems must take older workers and their
specific requirements, different skill-sets, interests, and abilities into account [34, 47].
in prior work, we have shown that good user interface design is crucial for successful and
trustful interaction with automated production systems [ 125] and robots interacting closely with
humans [ 14]. well-designed user interfaces mitigate automation biases by enabling operators to
intervene should automation fail [19].
example. taking the production of an e-vehicle as an example, the internet of production
results in changes for workers along the value chain. through human-centered design of decision
dashboards and approaches such as explainable ai, decision support systems can provide transpar-
ent suggestions for improving the performance of production processes, quality insurance, or the
supply chain, thus reducing human errors in decision making [ 19]. also, by continuously capturing
the interactions of experienced workers with the production systems, their knowledge can be
integrated to improve future recommendations for novices. further, digital images of the workers’
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.1:16 brauner et al.
capabilities and requirements can be generated and used to orchestrate the collaboration between
production systems and workers, for example, by adopting the speed of production process and
human-robot collaboration to the workers’ needs [102].
takeaway. overall, the adequacy of these systems and their design should not be determined
by experts from engineering, computer science, or ethics alone, but rather in partnership with the
employees. a participatory design ensures that the technological advances and implementations of
stpss are harmonized with people’s capabilities, norms, and values.
6.2 model-integrated artificial intelligence with autonomous agents in the iop
within the iop, the goal is to create a synergy between data-driven ai methods and state-of-the-art
model order reduction techniques from engineering mathematics across disciplinary boundaries.
this enables a high level of automation to realize real-time decisions, through built and shared
digital shadows. e.g., in e-vehicle manufacturing, sheet metal is still a fundamental material whose
processing consumes large amounts of energy, while deviations are safety-critical. therefore,
integrating reduced engineering models of material properties with machine learning in the hot
rolling process to inform artificial networks as digital shadows enables real-time compensations
for deviations during the process [ 103]. this adjustment allows significant energy savings. for this
degree of automation, which is needed to gain all data and knowledge from different sources and
domains worldwide to build digital shadows and realize model-integrated ai, we need autonomous
agents [ 131] based on various ai techniques like knowledge-based systems or machine learning to
name but a few. manual data queries that would otherwise be required would be infeasible given
the level of cross-domain collaboration and networking.
another example in e-vehicle manufacturing covers sophisticated logistics robots used in modern
modularized factories without assembly lines [ 25]. in such complex settings, sophisticated logistics
robots controlled by autonomous agents can help to assemble products, integrating different ai
methods [ 66,67]. similar methods were used for autonomous agents communicating as programs
with the www to realize semantic web applications [ 100,127]. in addition, further examples of
successful applications of agent technologies in industrial settings exist [90, 91].
in the iop, we develop autonomous agents, called wwl agents [21], in a multi-agent network
connected to information sources for semantic information, e.g., ontologies [ 99] and knowledge
graphs providing provenance information [ 57]. with the latter, it is possible to get, e.g., the origin
of data used for training an artificial neural network representing a particular digital shadow or
the usage history of mathematical models comprised within the digital shadow to solve difficult
production steps.
comparable agent systems in the literature are very often only used to support manufacturing
processes within a single production facility or company [ 75,90,91]. the novelty of our approach
is that the purpose of wwl agents is realizing interoperability in the wwl and breaking data
silos enabling data-intensive ai approaches, such as machine learning, to generate specific digital
shadows. for instance, communicating with agents from other companies, apply different ai
methods for sharing, generating, and using their data and digital shadows from different production
domains is their main function. furthermore, with semantic information about the origin of the
data, they can provide detailed information of solutions found by a wwl agent to users around
the world. in addition, this approach can incorporate existing local multi-agent production systems
if they provide an interface to the wwl.
explainable ai. to be able to present comprehensible results for humans as discussed above,
algorithms need to be able to explain why their results are reasonable and accurate. such explainable
ai methods [ 2,45] can be provided by knowledge-based systems because they represent the
knowledge in a human-understandable way [ 17]. however, one of the challenges is to find the
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.a computer science perspective on digital transformation in production 1:17
right explanations and their representation for production processes. further, other ai approaches
as, e.g., machine learning or process mining [3], need to be included in trustworthy explanations.
furthermore, in the iop, semantic information about the data in the wwl is available to calculate
appropriate answers. given that the iop presents a well-understood domain [ 20], the semantic
information is already represented in existing models and methods. however, it is often not machine-
readable and not yet linked to the raw machine-produced sensor data, which need to be exploited
by software agents. open questions are how to gain machine-readable semantic information from
the existing models and how to link the semantic information from the engineering models to the
data to build trustworthy software agents [ 141] dealing with the semantics in digital shadows and
supporting the decision process of engineers in the wwl.
wwl agent dialogs. in the vision of the iop, wwl agents realize user dialogs via interfaces
like shown, e.g., in figure 1, and help the users to get the appropriate answers to their problem
in the sense that it improves the product and the production processes. these agents need to
be interconnected within the wwl to enable them to integrate information from external data
sources as well. with this information, the agents are able to compute solutions or suggestions
and generate answers to the user requests. here, the challenges lie in realizing a human-machine
communication that is understandable for the humans working in the production. additionally, the
relevant information from the wwl has to be identified to give adequate answers, which really
lead to process improvements.
multi-agent network. we claim that only the wwl delivers the amount and variation of
data that is necessary to build digital shadows as, e.g., trained artificial neural networks, so that
they can provide aids for specific purposes in a production process. therefore, wwl agents in a
world-wide multi-agent network are a key factor in reaching this level of interoperability.
by communicating via the wwl, the agents share services, data, and knowledge, so that other
agents can support their local clients with their production. in that way, it is possible, for instance, to
realize a fully automated on-demand pull production [ 70], with implications along the whole supply
chain, as long as every participant is connected to the wwl. thus, production can dynamically
adapt to local or global changes, such as product design modifications, local production failures, or
supply chain variances in case of a strike, natural disaster, or pandemic. the challenges range from
finding the appropriate network structure for the agents to how requests to agents are processed.
standardized and open communication protocols. similar to the www, the wwl can
only unfold its full function if a crucial number of participants is able to share their information in
the network. the success of the www was only possible because there was an open access to all
its protocols as http. therefore, for the iop we intend to let the autonomous agents use protocols
based on http and other open standards. furthermore, new protocols which are needed for the
communication between the autonomous agents have to be freely available and standardized in
the long run to let everyone participate in the wwl with their own agent.
connection to versioned data storages and ontologies. the agents in the wwl have to be
connected to various information sources to gain the knowledge they need to give proper answers
to the user. for doing so, the agents need semantic information about the posed queries. therefore,
we want to use semantic techniques, for example, ontologies [ 116] and versioned knowledge
graphs providing provenance information about data, models, and knowledge from production
processes [ 57]. with the former, the agents gain semantic information about the terms which are
used in user requests. with the latter, the agent can get provenance information about the origin
of production data or the history of a product part. here, challenges are, for instance, how the
semantic information can be used and how the information from different data sources can be
combined to improve production processes.
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.1:18 brauner et al.
example. assume a setting where an e-vehicle manufacturer wants to improve the material
choice for the main car body. then the engineer, e.g., instructs a wwl agent to first collect
information about available steel composites from different steel producers and then analyze them
according to the characteristics of the local production process as described by a digital shadow.
this digital shadow could be created by another agent in the wwl analyzing the processes in the
car factory and using ai methods such as machine learning. provided with semantic information
about the processes and the materials which are planned to be used, a wwl agent can give the
user a detailed answer with explanations and links to the provenance of the agent’s information.
takeaway. the integration of (mathematical) models from engineering with ai models enables
new opportunities, and makes wwl agents the enabling factor in the iop. to this end, they rely
on the connection to various data sources from different production companies, and standardized
protocols. existing knowledge-based agent technology needs further extensions to meet the demands of
the manufacturing industry in the setting of the iop.
6.3 model-driven digital shadows
the term model-driven refers to development methodologies that rely on abstract models of systems
as central development artifacts [ 148]. these models carry explicit domain expertise and serve
as a foundation for communication, documentation, analysis, and synthesis in agile development
projects [ 129]. they can be systematically transformed into concrete implementations [ 49] such as
digital twins [ 13,43], privacy-preserving iot systems [ 104], information systems [ 54], or assistive
systems [ 105]. digital shadows [ 88,128,135] relate to models, can carry models themselves, and
serve as (aggregated) abstractions of models for automated processing [13, 43].
cross-domain collaboration. interdisciplinary teams consisting of experts from the produc-
tion domain, computer science, automation, and many more develop a new generation of cyber-
physical production systems. all of them contribute individual expertise, perspectives, paradigms,
technologies, and solutions to the iop. and often, this expertise is encoded in different kinds of
models [ 69,105,152]. the successful and efficient integration of domain-specific knowledge into
the iop is crucial to construct the multi-perspective data and models at design time, simulation time,
and run time. in our vision, digital shadows also serve to semantically enrich process data to enable
(automated) decision making in (domain-specific) real time. to this end, they must be semantically
integrated with data and models engineered during design and simulation [ 80]. this need demands
a modeling of detailed aspects (from manufacturing system details to factory behavior, to strategic
goals, to interface descriptions) in sufficiently formal languages [129, 130].
systems engineering. model-driven systems engineering [ 12,42] lifts models to primary
development artifacts that increase abstraction and engineering efficiency in the interdisciplinary
engineering of cyber-physical (production) systems. these models usually conform to (domain-
specific) modeling languages (such as simulink [ 37], sysml [ 51], or automationml [ 98]), that
provide experts with required functionality and facilitate describing and integrating systems
engineering concerns. consequently, the system description is distributed over several models and
tools that currently are not syntactically and semantically integrated. designing and engineering
the systems of the iop, therefore, demands novel solutions for the automated, ad-hoc integration of
modeling languages and their tools, e.g., as presented by dalibor et al. [ 41], such that experts of
the different domains can leverage modeling views tailored to their desired level of abstraction
across domain boundaries and optimized for analysis. software language engineering (sle) [ 68] is
a discipline that investigates the efficient engineering and integration of heterogeneous modeling
languages; hence sle is a crucial prerequisite for providing domain-specific representations and
integrating knowledge from various domains within the iop.
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.a computer science perspective on digital transformation in production 1:19
integrating modeling languages and tools. this model and language diversity [ 152] will
also be reflected in digital shadows that need to provide optimized structures for handling large
amounts of data, selected engineering models, formalized knowledge about data, models, and their
context. to this end, digital shadows need to be able to integrate high-volume structured and
unstructured data with semantically rich, detailed engineering models and knowledge bases. thus,
we need techniques capable of linking the different underlying modeling languages [ 27,138] at
system design time as well as ad-hoc at runtime. these techniques consider syntactic [ 62] and
semantic integration [ 33] to bridge semantic gaps between the languages used to express parts of
the digital shadows, as, e.g., realized for the design of experiments in injection molding [ 13]. a
first concept on how digital shadows can be created and are handled during runtime together with
process mining techniques has been derived [ 22]. efficiency is crucial to also enable an efficient
application to very large models. therefore, research should leverage techniques from database
schema modeling [ 76] and artificial intelligence to enable compositional mechanisms [ 28] for
syntactic and semantic abstraction, aggregation, and integration of data and models.
example. domain experts from e-vehicle production define one or more digital shadow types [22]
based on a conceptual model [ 10] for purposes related to production, e.g., quality monitoring or pre-
dictive maintenance. these types can be used as blueprints for concrete digital shadows recorded
from production data at runtime, e.g., a digital shadow type might serve the purpose to minimize
the product rejection rate of the grinding process of front window panes and capture the related
information accordingly. during runtime, the digital shadows are created according to their types
and populated with models, data, and metadata. using such digital shadows, the rejection rates
from every window pane are aggregated to every job on a grinding machine. periodically, a new
digital shadow is created that aggregates again the rejection rates based on the new time slice.
takeaway. purpose-driven digital shadows can be created and provided at runtime using design
time models; thus, model-driven development supports and simplifies the automation of production.
6.4 interconnected & industry-capable infrastructure
the concept of digital shadows is based on the notion that a problem-specific view on the overall
process can be derived from a sufficient amount of process-related data. to this end, process data
needs to be recorded and collected, ideally in a fine-grained manner and by a variety of different
sensors, to provide a comprehensive description of the process. subsequently, this description can
be scaled down to match the concrete requirements of a specific problem or task. in general, the
quality of the digital shadows correlates with the quality and the richness of the available data,
i.e., larger amounts of data are generally favorable. companies are thus incentivized to collect,
process, and store huge volumes and varieties of data, which consequently requires a capable
infrastructure. setting up this infrastructure and enabling the global wwl and its models introduce
several obstacles.
data integration. availability and accessibility of information with high data quality is an
important issue in many production and business processes. for example, the quality assurance of
production companies could require access to detailed process data a long time after the production
is finished, which cannot be realized by traditional data integration approaches that use carefully
engineered data processing workflows to extract, transform, and load data into an integrated data
store. for the collection of data, we envision a data lake platform in which data is stored in its
raw format without prior integration or aggregation [ 61,74]. compression techniques on sensor
data could be applied to address the real-time requirements by reducing the amount of data, but a
lossless compression should be guaranteed. for example, in a use case of laser powder bed fusion,
in which high power-density lasers are used to melt and fuse metallic powders, we apply dynamic
compression techniques to reduce the data volume, but to maintain the information content.
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.1:20 brauner et al.
the data lake stores raw data to avoid restricting the data analysis to a predefined integrated
schema. the data in the lake should be enriched with semantic metadata and data quality informa-
tion (e.g., source, accuracy, time) to make it interpretable and usable in various applications.
data collection. as the data lake is intended to collect information from many sources in the
wwl, the underlying infrastructure must be able to transfer very large amounts of data. this
requirement is independent of whether the data lake is deployed on-premise or in the cloud.
we already identified that cumulative data rates for a single production cell can easily be
in the range of giga- to petabytes for settings where several machines are interconnected [ 55].
directly transmitting all data is thus often infeasible as available data rates are too low. the current
bandwidth limitations dictate pre-processing and aggregation to make the wwl possible at all,
although this form of data reduction techniques technically contradicts our previously stated
requirement that data lakes should obtain all information. thus, it is vitally important to devise
domain knowledge-based methods which can first reduce the amount of data that needs to be
transferred without loss of information, e.g., if some values can be derived from others. in this
context, lipp et al. [ 96] propose a process-driven data collection that allows to statically configure
which data needs to be collected in which phase of the process at what granularity. this high level
of control allows to precisely adjust the amount of generated data to the required signal accuracy
as well as the available bandwidths.
similarly, compute capabilities in the network can also be used to first dynamically detect the
current process phase (opposed to the static definition by lipp et al.) and then scale the generated
data volume as needed, e.g., ensuring high data quality in times of interesting process behavior while
reducing the load in idle times [ 87]. additionally, these in-network processing techniques allow for
handling data at line-rate and can thus more easily further reduce the load by removing (presumed)
irrelevant information or by performing pre-computation steps [ 55]. finding the right trade-off
between storing as much raw data as possible while also adhering to infrastructure limitations by
reducing the transmitted data is currently a predominant challenge. in the aforementioned use case
of laser powder bed fusion, for example, the compression techniques automatically adapt their
configuration to the network bandwidth, processing capabilities, and data structures. provisioning
a suitable infrastructure with sufficient bandwidth and storage capabilities is certainly a long-term
goal, enhanced by carefully placed and designed in-network compute functions.
low-latency guarantees. apart from high data rates, the iop-enabling infrastructure must
also satisfy tight latency bounds, which, for example, are needed for process control [ 132]. this
constraint is particularly relevant if decisions are to be made by a remote system or individual based
on broader information from the data lake, rather than by process-near controllers solely based
on local knowledge. in this case, physical latencies between the processes and remote systems
are often already too high for very time-critical applications (sometimes with requirements in
the one-digit millisecond range), rendering pure remote solutions, e.g., over the internet, infea-
sible. in-network processing again offers a solution as control programs can be deployed in the
network and thus significantly reduce the inherent latencies. these programs currently range
from simple lqr controllers [ 132] to basic line detection mechanisms [ 56] and can thus cover a
variety of simple control tasks. additionally, complementary safety measures, such as emergency
stops, can also be realized in networking hardware, as is demonstrated by cesen et al. [ 31]. the
accuracy and computing speed of such approaches is generally capable of reaching levels similar to
userspace applications, while networking devices are especially capable of processing significantly
higher packet rates [ 86]. yet, implementing the required functionality on the current generation of
programmable networking hardware is still challenging [86].
control loops. thus, in the context of the iop, we envision that critical decisions for cyber-
physical control loops are made quickly within the production cell, e.g., emergency shutoffs for
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.a computer science perspective on digital transformation in production 1:21
safety reasons. more complex controls are then implemented at the edge, within the network (in-
network processing), or in the cloud, where they can source additional data sources. consequently,
the (local) decision quality improves with an iop. due to the interconnected nature of manufacturing
processes, companies even have the chance to account for issues in subsequent process steps. for
example, they can react to slight deviations or inaccuracies with control loop adjustments in the
next production cell, effectively implementing a real-time control loop for the shop floor. here,
companies can rely on well-known approaches, or, in line with the internet of production, they can
utilize control loop adjustments that originate from model-integrated artificial intelligence and the
knowledge base in form of the world wide lab.
device heterogeneity. the immense heterogeneity regarding the involved sensors and machin-
ery, which often characterizes industrial production settings, is another challenge that needs to be
addressed [ 1,35]. for example, depending on the vendor, sensors might differ in their expressiveness
or in the protocols that they support. addressing this challenge on a system user’s level, bodenben-
ner et al. [ 16] propose a domain-specific language that abstracts from the sensor-specific details and
allows a unified access to the sensor information. however, their solution does not directly address
how such sensors can actually be integrated and interconnected on a technical level. additionally,
devices can also change dynamically, e.g., if a process is reconfigured to allow for the production of
different products. high flexibility is thus one of the most important infrastructure requirements.
especially when considering the long lifetime of industrial devices, protocols capable of providing
security even in these heterogeneous settings are needed [ 40]. paniagua et al. [ 113] provide a survey
of different architectural frameworks for industry 4.0, such as fiware, international data space
(ids) [ 112], or basys4.0. although these frameworks also address device heterogeneity, they are
not specific on the level of communication protocols. more specific digital industrial platforms
are provided by different industry 4.0 key players such as siemens (mindsphere) or bosch (iot
suite) [ 115]. however, these platforms are often customer-specific solutions, i.e., they claim to
address heterogeneous data and devices, but often require a significant customization effort to fit
the needs of specific use cases. additionally, we note that despite the trends of security-by-design
and privacy-by-design, devices and protocols must be configured correctly to benefit from these,
which is, however, a frequently neglected aspect [38, 39].
example. overall, an interconnected and industry-capable infrastructure will enable the e-
vehicle manufacturer to move away from a traditional assembly line towards a more dynamically
reconfigurable sequence of production steps [ 25]. in this context, the flexible data collection and
integration centered around the data lake is key for ensuring a sufficient richness of data even in
such dynamic settings; thus, allowing access to detailed process information at all times, e.g., for
quality assurance purposes. while technical advancements, e.g., regarding storage and data rates,
are important to steadily increase the amount of processible data, layered control loops will enable
a fine-grained control of all running processes to improve the overall efficiency of the system and
allow for quick responses to system changes.
takeaway. the specific characteristics of industrial environments pose challenges that cannot be
addressed by traditional data management and networking solutions, as some aspects require the inclu-
sion of remote services or edge computing while other aspects simply do not support such approaches.
instead, a concept is needed, which carefully includes mechanisms to satisfy all of the mentioned needs:
high-data rates, support for heterogeneous data structures, low-latency data processing, and flexibility.
7 strategic research directions for the internet of production
the challenges discussed above show that a sustainable transition towards smart industrial produc-
tion within the framework of industry 4.0 is necessary that goes well beyond an interdisciplinary
collaboration between engineers and computer scientists. several disciplines are being involved in
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.1:22 brauner et al.
challengeslayers                       .standardized  (data) interfacesinterconnecting (domain) knowledgeburden-free operationreal-world integrationlong-term (information) usagehumaneinterfacescontext- and user-centered interfacesfacilitate transferof expertisebias-freeautomationtransparent automationmodeling of tacit knowledgeautonomousagentsstandardized communication protocolsmulti-agentnetworkwwlagent dialogsexplainable aiconnection to versioned data stores and ontologiesmodel-drivendigital shadowsintegrating modelinglanguages and toolssystemsengineeringdomain-specific representationinterfacedescriptioncross-domaincollaborationinterconnected infrastructure& datadeviceheterogeneitydataintegrationlow-latency guaranteesdatacollectionpersistentidentifiers
fig. 4. matrix of strategic research directions and layers in the internet of production. the size of the blue
circles corresponds to the priority (the bigger the more important).
computer science, as we have demonstrated with the level-based construction of arguments in the
previous section. while we have so far approached the challenges individually by computer science
disciplines, we are now looking at a comprehensive view of necessary research efforts. to this end,
in the following, we present five general research areas in the domain of computer science that
need to be addressed to turn the concept of the internet of production into reality. figure 4 gives
an overview of the research areas and the required research efforts.
standardized (data) interfaces. first, to ensure compatibility between individual components,
standardized interfaces and communication protocols are necessary. this is an elementary pre-
requisite for a large-scale infrastructure in which heterogeneous data sources and vendor-specific
peculiarities participate. the development of a single all-embracing formalism is unrealistic. instead,
mechanisms for linking and mapping between different data sources, models, and systems need to
be developed. these mechanisms finally enable the linking of the current information silos. to be
able to process queries over such linked data sets, the query processing mechanisms must take
mappings into account and should be able to retrieve and to reconcile data from different sources.
model-based systems can facilitate the aggregation of heterogeneous systems. these systems,
in turn, help autonomous agents to communicate with each other and with the devices in the
wwl via standardized interfaces. thereby, the knowledge representation in the iop should also
be standardized. as the last element, interfaces to humans need to be included here, which can,
for example, be normalized or specifically adapted for the usage context. ultimately, the concept
of digital shadows must be further refined here, as their combination with humans can form an
exceptionally smart joint cognitive system. the domain knowledge leads us to the next aspect.
interconnecting (domain) knowledge. the interconnected domain knowledge must be share-
able and accessible to contribute to the global knowledge base. it must be accessible by autonomous
agent networks, as well as operators that want to build on the knowledge from other domains. to
this end, mechanisms and models must be developed, to allow integration and provision of metadata
and context together with the data. today, most research on security and privacy is focused on
specific human-specific data. to enable secure collaboration in competitive industrial scenarios,
appropriate technical solutions are needed, with a special emphasis on the area of connecting
previously unaffiliated businesses. here, questions arise that look into the privacy-preserving
matching of relevant resources with an inquiring party. the goal should be to create a distributed
decentralized knowledge service that operates on data in the wwl.
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.a computer science perspective on digital transformation in production 1:23
burden-free operation. some hurdles need to be overcome on the path to a world-scale
deployment. a burden-free operation ensures that companies are interested in connecting to the iop
and integrate it into their production sites. therefore, an effortless implementation must be ensured.
model-based approaches need to be seamlessly integrated to allow autonomous information sharing
for triggered queries, answered by autonomous agents. hereby, it is essential that automation
without human intervention works flawlessly and that automated support systems with a human-
in-the-loop are designed right to avoid automation bias and the development of mistrust. the
infrastructure needs to ensure low-latency guarantees, despite the underlying unstructured peer-
to-peer topology. likewise, real-time constraints mandate automated protocols for bargaining,
information retrieval, and exchange, as well as for billing. consequentially, the system must be
adaptable for a diverse set of specific use cases.
real-world integration. the large amount of available production scenarios poses a challenge
to the real-world integration of the internet of production. even more, within these scenarios, the
vast amount of data from heterogeneous sources and their representation in interfaces, as well as
their management, are open concerns. in particular, methods for capturing and integrating expertise
are missing, especially on the scale of industrial knowledge and data rates. they are crucial to provide
sufficient input for the ai component of the production queries. at the same time, operation on the
data needs to be transparent to involved humans, including aspects such as explainable ai. key
questions evolve around what information is relevant and how it can be made accessible, transparent,
and actionable in a meaningful way, while preserving data correctness [ 117], to maximize the
benefits. with regard to the transition of existing systems, some research opportunities arise. on
the one hand, existing model-based representations of expert knowledge need to be re-used. on
the other hand, current data silos need to be added into a distributed data storage infrastructure, to
enable long-term gains.
long-term (information) usage. finally, the last aspect of our research roadmap towards the
internet of production is long-term usage. once the required infrastructure is in place, it needs to
be flexible enough to be sustained for future generations of industrial production systems. research
on how to implement accountability [ 118,123] and provenance [ 57] information in scenarios with
wildly-branched dependencies and origins is still in its infancy. thereby, versioned data is required
for agents for consecutive information and explainability. regarding humane aspects, modeling
of tacit knowledge and its digital capture needs to be enabled for the long run. guarantees for
data quality and derived models must be defined to enable not only the usage of data but also to
support later reusability. hereby, feedback and recovery mechanisms need to ensure the connection
between models and data, in a permanent, traceable, and synchronous manner. related to this is
defining persistent identifiers for models, data, metadata, and other objects [ 59]. further aspects
requiring research are long-term reliability of data storage and derived decisions. similarly, means
for conflict resolution need to be integrated into the iop; only then, the risks for querying and
utilizing the iop are mitigated.
next steps. to arrive at the envisioned global internet of production, the mentioned research
areas have to advance simultaneously and in close collaboration. hence, experts with suitable
interdisciplinary backgrounds are essential. in its entirety, the true value of the world wide lab
as the iop’s prime application will increase through the connection and commitment of as many
participants as possible.
8 conclusion
our vision of the internet of production (iop) and its enabling concepts of the world wide lab
and digital shadows extend beyond singular cps and aim at the complete vertical and horizontal
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.1:24 brauner et al.
integration of production systems, smart data analytics, autonomous agents, and task-, context-,
and user-adaptive interfaces.
to implement this vision and to realize significant improvements in production, numerous activi-
ties in multiple domains are necessary. in this paper, we focused on research areas originating from
computer science: production systems must be securely interconnected between different locations,
heterogeneous data streams from various systems must be captured, processed, aggregated, stored
with a sufficient level of detail, and semantically enriched. an infrastructure for synchronous
and asynchronous access to the data must be developed, existing data analysis methods must be
applied, and new algorithms that fit the data and processes must be designed. queries are not
necessarily user-defined as concepts from ai should be implemented to establish new connections
between the collected data and derived digital shadows. finally, the results of these analyses must
be transparently communicated to users of the iop.
the changes we propose do not have to be implemented overnight, nor can they be. instead,
the iop allows for a phased approach. for example, retrofitting is a suitable approach, which
acknowledges existing asset-heavy long-term investments by upgrading them with sensors and
actuators to get smart production systems [ 82]. this also effectively addresses the issue of sustain-
able production systems [ 142]. in further enhancement steps, initially limited wwl agents can
then integrate further ai tools as long as open interfaces are available.
short-term benefits of the iop result from higher production efficiency through smarter produc-
tion control for faster product and innovation cycles, that learns to adapt to new materials and
products, and interfaces that make production states transparent. in the long term, the wwl as
an application of the iop will improve production engineering research, increase the viability of
industrial manufacturing, and positively impact society and the environment as a whole: by uncov-
ering previously unknown relationships along and across process chains, through the identification
of new potential to optimize the production efficiency, energy consumption, and value creation,
and by designing interfaces that increase employee autonomy, integrate their capabilities, and are
aligned with their values.
beyond process chains in manufacturing, further implications up to the management level of
companies are to be expected by the possibilities the iop offers. the flexibility unlocked through new
data streams will also impact business models. for example, new, dynamic forms of collaboration
in corporate networks through data-driven platforms will emerge, extending the research scope
from engineering and computer science to economic disciplines.
we conclude that many complex research challenges still remain to be solved to realize the vision
of a trusted, interconnected, and intelligent production landscape. however, the work towards the
internet of production requires an overarching commitment to provide measurable benefits for
industry, research, and society. thus, to turn the vision of increasingly networked, smarter, and
sustainable industrial production into reality, all aspects and their comprehensive and interwoven
effects must be well-aligned and understood deeply. conversely, this requires large, heterogeneous,
and interdisciplinary teams led by an integrated research framework. we intend to contribute to
achieving these goals within our ongoing research cluster internet of production , and invite
everyone within computer science to join us in contributing research towards the challenges laid
out in this paper.
acknowledgments
the authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers and the editor for their valuable
feedback and comments. funded by the deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft (dfg, german research
foundation) under germany’s excellence strategy – exc-2023 internet of production – 390621612.
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.a computer science perspective on digital transformation in production 1:25
references
[1]mohammad aazam, sherali zeadally, and khaled a. harras. 2018. deploying fog computing in industrial internet of
things and industry 4.0. ieee transactions on industrial informatics 14, 10, 4674–4682. https://doi.org/10.1109/tii.
2018.2855198
[2]amina adadi and mohammed berrada. 2018. peeking inside the black-box: a survey on explainable artificial
intelligence (xai). ieee access 6, 52138–52160. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2018.2870052
[3]jan niklas adams, sebastiaan j. van zelst, lara quack, kathrin hausmann et al .2021. a framework for explainable
concept drift detection in process mining. in 19th int. conf. on business process management (bpm ’21) , vol. 12875.
springer, 400–416. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-85469-0_25
[4]alejandro barredo arrieta, natalia díaz-rodríguez, javier del ser, adrien bennetot et al .2020. explainable artificial
intelligence (xai): concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible ai. information fusion 58,
82–115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2019.12.012
[5]lennart bader, jan pennekamp, roman matzutt, david hedderich et al .2021. blockchain-based privacy preserva-
tion for supply chains supporting lightweight multi-hop information accountability. information processing &
management 58, 3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2021.102529
[6]lisanne bainbridge. 1983. ironies of automation. automatica 19, 6, 775–779. https://doi.org/10.1016/0005-1098(83)
90046-8
[7] eric ballot, benoit montreuil, and russell meller. 2014. the physical internet . la documentation française.
[8]barbara rita barricelli, elena casiraghi, and daniela fogli. 2019. a survey on digital twin: definitions, characteristics,
applications, and design implications. ieee access 7, 167653–167671. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2019.2953499
[9]gordon baxter, john rooksby, yuanzhi wang, and ali khajeh-hosseini. 2012. the ironies of automation: still going
strong at 30?. in 30th europ. conf. on cognitive ergonomics (ecce ’12) . acm, 65–71. https://doi.org/10.1145/2448136.
2448149
[10] fabian becker, pascal bibow, manuela dalibor, aymen gannouni et al .2021. a conceptual model for digital shadows
in industry and its application. in 40th int. conf. on conceptual modeling (er’21) , vol. 13011. springer, 271–281.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-89022-3_22
[11] paolo bellavista and alessio mora. 2019. edge cloud as an enabler for distributed ai in industrial iot applications:
the experience of the iotwins project. in 1st workshop on artificial intelligence and internet of things (ai&iot 2019) ,
vol. 2502. ceur-ws, 1–15.
[12] luca berardinelli, alexandra mazak, oliver alt, manuel wimmer, and gerti kappel. 2017. model-driven systems
engineering: principles and application in the cpps domain . springer, 261–299. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
56345-9_11
[13] pascal bibow, manuela dalibor, christian hopmann, ben mainz et al .2020. model-driven development of a digital
twin for injection molding. in 32nd int. conf. on advanced information systems engineering (caise ’20) , vol. 12127.
springer, 85–100. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49435-3_6
[14] hannah biermann, philipp brauner, and martina ziefle. 2021. how context and design shape human-robot trust
and attributions. paladyn, journal of behavioural robotics 12, 1, 74–86. https://doi.org/10.1515/pjbr-2021-0008
[15] florian biesinger, davis meike, benedikt kraß, and michael weyrich. 2019. a digital twin for production planning
based on cyber-physical systems: a case study for a cyber-physical system-based creation of a digital twin.
procedia cirp 79, 355–360. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2019.02.087
[16] matthias bodenbenner, mark pascal sanders, benjamin montavon, and robert h. schmitt. 2020. domain-specific
language for sensors in the internet of production. in 10th congress of the german academic association for production
technology (wgp ’20) , vol. 20. springer, 448–456. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-62138-7_45
[17] ronald j. brachman and hector j. levesque. 2004. knowledge representation and reasoning (1st ed.). morgan
kaufmann. https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-1-55860-932-7.x5083-3
[18] arnaud braud, gaël fromentoux, benoit radier, and olivier le grand. 2021. the road to european digital sovereignty
with gaia-x and idsa. ieee network 35, 2, 4–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/mnet.2021.9387709
[19] philipp brauner, ralf philipsen, andré calero valdez, martina ziefle, and ralf philipsen. 2019. what happens when
decision support systems fail? – the importance of usability on performance in erroneous systems. behaviour &
information technology 38, 12, 1225–1242. https://doi.org/10.1080/0144929x.2019.1581258
[20] christian brecher, sabina jeschke, günther schuh, susanne aghassi et al .2012. integrative production technology for
high-wage countries . springer, 17–76. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-21067-9_2
[21] florian brillowski, lars gleim, martin liebenberg, thomas schemmer et al .2021. towards a continuously improving
composites manufacturing by employing the internet of production. in composites and advanced materials expo
conf. (camx ’21) .
[22] tobias brockhoff, malte heithoff, istván koren, judith michael et al .2021. process prediction with digital twins. in
companion proc. acm/ieee 24th int. conf. on model driven engineering languages and systems (models-c ’21) . ieee.
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.1:26 brauner et al.
https://doi.org/10.1109/models-c53483.2021.00032
[23] manfred broy. 2006. challenges in automotive software engineering. in 28th int. conf. on software engineering
(icse’06) . acm, 33–42. https://doi.org/10.1145/1134285.1134292
[24] koen bruynseels, filippo santoni de sio, and jeroen van den hoven. 2018. digital twins in health care: ethical
implications of an emerging engineering paradigm. frontiers in genetics 9, 31. https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2018.
00031
[25] armin f. buckhorst, benjamin montavon, dominik wolfschläger, melanie buchsbaum et al .2021. holarchy for
line-less mobile assembly systems operation in the context of the internet of production. procedia cirp 99, 448–453.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2021.03.064
[26] bundesministerium für bildung und forschung. 2015 (accessed may 26, 2021). industrie 4.0. https://www.bmbf.de/de/
zukunftsprojekt-industrie-4-0-848.html.
[27] arvid butting, robert eikermann, oliver kautz, bernhard rumpe, and andreas wortmann. 2018. modeling language
variability with reusable language components. in 22nd int. systems and software product line conference (splc
’18). acm, 65–75. https://doi.org/10.1145/3233027.3233037
[28] arvid butting, jerome pfeiffer, bernhard rumpe, and andreas wortmann. 2020. a compositional framework for
systematic modeling language reuse. in 23rd acm/ieee int. conf. on model driven engineering languages and
systems (models ’20) . acm, 35–46. https://doi.org/10.1145/3365438.3410934
[29] andré calero valdez, philipp brauner, anne kathrin schaar, andreas holzinger, and martina ziefle. 2015. reducing
complexity with simplicity - usability methods for industry 4.0. in 19th triennial congress of the international
ergonomics association (iea ’15) . iea. https://doi.org/10.13140/rg.2.1.4253.6809
[30] catapult. 2013 (accessed may 26, 2021). high value manufacturing catapult. https://hvm.catapult.org.uk/.
[31] fabricio e. rodriguez cesen, levente csikor, carlos recalde, christian esteve rothenberg, and gergely pongrácz.
2020. towards low latency industrial robot control in programmable data planes. in 6th ieee conf. on network
softwarization (netsoft ’20) . ieee, 165–169. https://doi.org/10.1109/netsoft48620.2020.9165531
[32] arnab chakrabarti, christoph quix, sandra geisler, jaroslav pullmann et al .2018. goal-oriented modelling of
relations and dependencies in data marketplaces. in 11th int. i* workshop (istar ’18) co-located with the 30th int.
conf. on advanced information systems engineering (caise ’18) , vol. 2118. ceur workshop proceedings.
[33] benoit combemale, jörg kienzle, gunter mussbacher, olivier barais et al .2018. concern-oriented language devel-
opment (cold): fostering reuse in language engineering. computer languages, systems & structures 54, 139–155.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cl.2018.05.004
[34] sara j. czaja, walter r. boot, neil charness, and wendy a. rogers. 2009. designing for older adults: principles and
creative human factors approaches (3rd ed.). crc press. https://doi.org/10.1201/b22189
[35] li da xu, wu he, and shancang li. 2014. internet of things in industries: a survey. ieee transactions on industrial
informatics 10, 4, 2233–2243. https://doi.org/10.1109/tii.2014.2300753
[36] li da xu, eric l. xu, and ling li. 2018. industry 4.0: state of the art and future trends. international journal of
production research 56, 8, 2941–2962. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1444806
[37] james b. dabney and thomas l. harman. 2003. mastering simulink (1st ed.). pearson.
[38] markus dahlmanns, johannes lohmöller, ina berenice fink, jan pennekamp et al .2020. easing the conscience with
opc ua: an internet-wide study on insecure deployments. in acm internet measurement conference (imc ’20) .
acm, 101–110. https://doi.org/10.1145/3419394.3423666
[39] markus dahlmanns, johannes lohmöller, jan pennekamp, jörn bodenhausen et al .2022. missed opportunities:
measuring the untapped tls support in the industrial internet of things. in 17th acm asia conf. on computer and
communications security (asiaccs ’22) . acm. https://doi.org/10.1145/3488932.3497762
[40] markus dahlmanns, jan pennekamp, ina berenice fink, bernd schoolmann et al .2021. transparent end-to-end
security for publish/subscribe communication in cyber-physical systems. in 1st acm workshop on secure and
trustworthy cyber-physical systems (sat-cps ’21) . acm, 78–87. https://doi.org/10.1145/3445969.3450423
[41] manuela dalibor, nico jansen, judith michael, bernhard rumpe, and andreas wortmann. 2019. towards sustain-
able systems engineering-integrating tools via component and connector architectures. in antriebstechnisches
kolloquium 2019: tagungsband zur konferenz . books on demand, 121–133.
[42] manuela dalibor, nico jansen, bernhard rumpe, louis wachtmeister, and andreas wortmann. 2019. model-driven
systems engineering for virtual product design. in acm/ieee 22nd int. conf. on model driven engineering languages
and systems companion (models-c ’19) . ieee, 430–435. https://doi.org/10.1109/models-c.2019.00069
[43] manuela dalibor, judith michael, bernhard rumpe, simon varga, and andreas wortmann. 2020. towards a model-
driven architecture for interactive digital twin cockpits. in 39th int. conf. on conceptual modeling (er ’20) , vol. 12400.
springer, 377–387. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-62522-1_28
[44] dominik dellermann, philipp ebel, matthias söllner, and jan marco leimeister. 2019. hybrid intelligence. business &
information systems engineering 61, 5, 637–643. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-019-00595-2
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.a computer science perspective on digital transformation in production 1:27
[45] derek doran, sarah schulz, and tarek r. besold. 2017. what does explainable ai really mean? a new conceptual-
ization of perspectives. in 1st int. workshop on comprehensibility and explanation in ai and ml (cex ’17) , vol. 2071.
ceur workshop proceedings.
[46] mica r. endsley. 2017. from here to autonomy: lessons learned from human–automation research. human
factors 59, 1, 5–27. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720816681350
[47] paola fantini, marta pinzone, and marco taisch. 2020. placing the operator at the centre of industry 4.0 design:
modelling and assessing human activities within cyber-physical systems. computers & industrial engineering 139.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2018.01.025
[48] oliver fisher, nicholas watson, laura porcu, darren bacon et al .2018. cloud manufacturing as a sustainable process
manufacturing route. journal of manufacturing systems 47, 53–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2018.03.005
[49] robert france and bernhard rumpe. 2007. model-driven development of complex software: a research roadmap.
infuture of software engineering (fose ’07) . ieee, 37–54. https://doi.org/10.1109/fose.2007.14
[50] enzo morosini frazzon, jens hartmann, thomas makuschewitz, and bernd scholz-reiter. 2013. towards socio-cyber-
physical systems in production networks. procedia cirp 7, 49–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2013.05.009
[51] sanford friedenthal, alan moore, and rick steiner. 2014. a practical guide to sysml: the systems modeling language
(3rd ed.). morgan kaufmann.
[52] günter gans, matthias jarke, stefanie kethers, and gerhard lakemeyer. 2003. continuous requirements management
for organisation networks: a (dis) trust-based approach. requirements engineering 8, 1, 4–22. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00766-002-0163-8
[53] jie gao, yinliang yao, valerie c. y. zhu, linyan sun, and lin lin. 2011. service-oriented manufacturing: a new
product pattern and manufacturing paradigm. journal of intelligent manufacturing 22, 435—446. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10845-009-0301-y
[54] arkadii gerasimov, judith michael, lukas netz, bernhard rumpe, and simon varga. 2020. continuous transition
from model-driven prototype to full-size real-world enterprise information systems. in 25th americas conf. on
information systems (amcis ’20) . ais, 1–10.
[55] rené glebke, martin henze, klaus wehrle, philipp niemietz et al .2019. a case for integrated data processing
in large-scale cyber-physical systems. in 52nd hawaii int. conf. on system sciences (hicss ’19) . ais, 7252–7261.
https://doi.org/10.24251/hicss.2019.871
[56] rené glebke, johannes krude, ike kunze, jan rüth et al .2019. towards executing computer vision functionality
on programmable network devices. in 1st acm conext workshop on emerging in-network computing paradigms
(encp’19) . acm, 15–20. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359993.3366646
[57] lars gleim, jan pennekamp, martin liebenberg, melanie buchsbaum et al .2020. factdag: formalizing data
interoperability in an internet of production. ieee internet of things journal 7, 4, 3243–3253. https://doi.org/10.1109/
jiot.2020.2966402
[58] kate goddard, abdul roudsari, and jeremy c. wyatt. 2012. automation bias: a systematic review of frequency,
effect mediators, and mitigators. journal of the american medical informatics association 19, 1, 121–127. https:
//doi.org/10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000089
[59] pavel golodoniuc, nicholas j. car, and jens klump. 2017. distributed persistent identifiers system design. data
science journal 16, 34. https://doi.org/10.5334/dsj-2017-034
[60] david gunning. 2019. apics dictionary, 16th ed. ascm.
[61] rihan hai. 2020. data integration and metadata management in data lakes . ph. d. dissertation. rwth aachen
university. https://doi.org/10.18154/rwth-2020-08233
[62] robert heim, pedram mir seyed nazari, bernhard rumpe, and andreas wortmann. 2016. compositional language
engineering using generated, extensible, static type-safe visitors. in 12th european conf. on modelling foundations
and applications (ecmfa ’16) , vol. 9764. springer, 67–82. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-42061-5_5
[63] martin henze. 2020. the quest for secure and privacy-preserving cloud-based industrial cooperation. in conf. on
communications and network security (cns ’20) . ieee. https://doi.org/10.1109/cns48642.2020.9162199
[64] jens hiller, jan pennekamp, markus dahlmanns, martin henze et al .2019. tailoring onion routing to the internet of
things: security and privacy in untrusted environments. in 27th int. conf. on network protocols (icnp ’19) . ieee.
https://doi.org/10.1109/icnp.2019.8888033
[65] kevin anthony hoff and masooda bashir. 2015. trust in automation: integrating empirical evidence on factors that
influence trust. human factors 57, 3, 407–434. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720814547570
[66] till hofmann, nicolas limpert, victor mataré, alexander ferrein, and gerhard lakemeyer. 2019. winning the
robocup logistics league with fast navigation, precise manipulation, and robust goal reasoning. in robocup 2019:
robot world cup xxiii , vol. 11531. springer, 504–516. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-35699-6_41
[67] till hofmann, nicolas limpert, victor mataré, sebastian schönitz et al .2018. the carologistics robocup logistics
team 2018 . technical report. rwth aachen university and aachen university of applied sciences.
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.1:28 brauner et al.
[68] katrin hölldobler, bernhard rumpe, and andreas wortmann. 2018. software language engineering in the large:
towards composing and deriving languages. computer languages, systems & structures 54, 386–405. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cl.2018.08.002
[69] gregor höpfner, georg jacobs, thilo zerwas, imke drave et al .2021. model-based design workflows for cyber-
physical systems applied to an electric-mechanical coolant pump. in 19th drive train technology conference (atk
’21), vol. 1097. iop publishing. https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-899x/1097/1/012004
[70] wallace j. hopp and mark l. spearman. 2004. to pull or not to pull: what is the question? manufacturing & service
operations management 6, 2, 133–148. https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.1030.0028
[71] industrial value chain initiative. 2019 (accessed may 26, 2021). what is ivi? – industrial value chain initiative.
https://iv-i.org/wp/en/about-us/whatsivi/.
[72] international trade administration. 2021 (accessed may 26, 2021). korea - manufacturing technology - smart factory.
https://www.privacyshield.gov/article?id=korea-manufacturing-technology-smart-factory.
[73] matthias jarke. 2020. data sovereignty and the internet of production. in 32nd int. conf. on advanced information
systems engineering (caise ’20) , vol. 12127. springer, 549–558. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49435-3_34
[74] matthias jarke and christoph quix. 2017. on warehouses, lakes, and spaces: the changing role of conceptual modeling
for data integration . springer, 231–245. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67271-7_16
[75] szilárd jaskó, adrienn skrop, tibor holczinger, tibor chován, and jános abonyi. 2020. development of manufac-
turing execution systems in accordance with industry 4.0 requirements: a review of standard- and ontology-based
methodologies and tools. computers in industry 123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103300
[76] manfred a. jeusfeld, matthias jarke, and john mylopoulos. 2009. metamodeling for method engineering . the mit
press.
[77] david jones, chris snider, aydin nassehi, jason yon, and ben hicks. 2020. characterising the digital twin: a
systematic literature review. cirp journal of manufacturing science and technology 29, part a, 36–52. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cirpj.2020.02.002
[78] bzhwen a. kadir, ole broberg, and carolina souza da conceicao. 2019. current research and future perspectives on
human factors and ergonomics in industry 4.0. computers & industrial engineering 137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.
2019.106004
[79] ravi kalaiarasan, jan olhager, magnus wiktorsson, and yongkuk jeong. 2020. production logistics visibility
– perspectives, principles and prospects. in 9th swedish production symposium on advances in transdisciplinary
engineering (sps ’20) , vol. 13. ios press, 501–510. https://doi.org/10.3233/atde200188
[80] nasr kasrin, maliha qureshi, simon steuer, and daniela nicklas. 2018. semantic data management for experimental
manufacturing technologies. datenbank-spektrum 18, 1, 27–37. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13222-018-0274-0
[81] jörg christian kirchhof, judith michael, bernhard rumpe, simon varga, and andreas wortmann. 2020. model-driven
digital twin construction: synthesizing the integration of cyber-physical systems with their information systems.
in23rd acm/ieee int. conf. on model driven engineering languages and systems (models ’20) . acm, 90–101.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3365438.3410941
[82] istván koren. 2021. a standalone webassembly development environment for the internet of things. in 21st int.
conf. on web engineering (icwe ’21) , vol. 12706. springer, 353–360. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-74296-6_27
[83] istván koren, stefan braun, marc van dyck, and matthias jarke. 2021. dynamic strategic modeling for alliance-
driven data platforms: the case of smart farming. in 33rd int. conf. on advanced information systems engineering
(caise ’21) , vol. 424. springer, 92–99. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79108-7_11
[84] dejan kovachev, yiwei cao, ralf klamma, and matthias jarke. 2011. learn-as-you-go: new ways of cloud-based
micro-learning for the mobile web. in 10th int. conf. on advances in web-based learning (icwl ’11) , vol. 7048.
springer, 51–61. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-25813-8_6
[85] sathish a. p. kumar, r. madhumathi, pethuru raj chelliah, lei tao, and shangguan wang. 2018. a novel digital
twin-centric approach for driver intention prediction and traffic congestion avoidance. journal of reliable intelligent
environments 4, 4, 199–209. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40860-018-0069-y
[86] ike kunze, rené glebke, jan scheiper, matthias bodenbenner et al .2021. investigating the applicability of in-network
computing to industrial scenarios. in 4th ieee int. conf. on industrial cyber-physical systems (icps ’21) . ieee, 334–340.
https://doi.org/10.1109/icps49255.2021.9468247
[87] ike kunze, philipp niemietz, liam tirpitz, rené glebke et al .2021. detecting out-of-control sensor signals in sheet
metal forming using in-network computing. in 30th int. symposium on industrial electronics (isie ’21) . ieee.
[88] asma ladj, zhiqiang wang, oussama meski, farouk belkadi et al .2021. a knowledge-based digital shadow
for machining industry in a digital twin perspective. journal of manufacturing systems 58, part b, 168–179.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2020.07.018
[89] brenden m. lake, tomer d. ullman, joshua b. tenenbaum, and samuel j. gershman. 2017. building machines that
learn and think like people. behavioral and brain sciences 40, 2017. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0140525x16001837
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.a computer science perspective on digital transformation in production 1:29
[90] paulo leitão and stamatis karnouskos. 2015. industrial agents: emerging applications of software agents in industry
(1st ed.). morgan kaufmann.
[91] paulo leitao, stamatis karnouskos, luis ribeiro, jay lee et al .2016. smart agents in industrial cyber–physical systems.
proc. ieee 104, 5, 1086–1101. https://doi.org/10.1109/jproc.2016.2521931
[92] martin liebenberg and matthias jarke. 2020. information systems engineering with digital shadows: concept and
case studies. in 32nd int. conf. on advanced information systems engineering (caise ’20) , vol. 12127. springer, 70–84.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49435-3_5
[93] luca liehner, philipp brauner, anne kathrin schaar, and martina ziefle. 2021. delegation of moral tasks to automated
agents – the impact of risk and context on trusting a machine to perform a task. ieee transactions on technology
and society . https://doi.org/10.1109/tts.2021.3118355
[94] kendrik yan hong lim, pai zheng, and chun-hsien chen. 2020. a state-of-the-art survey of digital twin: techniques,
engineering product lifecycle management and business innovation perspectives. journal of intelligent manufacturing
31, 6, 1313–1337. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10845-019-01512-w
[95] fábio lima, caroline nogueira de carvalho, mayara b. s. acardi, eldiane gomes dos santos et al .2019. digital
manufacturing tools in the simulation of collaborative robots: towards industry 4.0. brazilian journal of operations
& production management 16, 2, 261–280. https://doi.org/10.14488/bjopm.2019.v16.n2.a8
[96] johannes lipp, maximilian rudack, uwe vroomen, and andreas bührig-polaczek. 2020. when to collect what?
optimizing data load via process-driven data collection. in 22nd int. conf. on enterprise information systems (iceis
’20). scitepress, 220–225. https://doi.org/10.5220/0009439502200225
[97] yongkui liu and xun xu. 2017. industry 4.0 and cloud manufacturing: a comparative analysis. journal of
manufacturing science and engineering 139, 3. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4034667
[98] arndt lüder and nicole schmidt. 2017. automationml in a nutshell . springer, 213–258. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-662-53248-5_61
[99] deborah l. mcguinness and frank van harmelen. 2004. owl web ontology language overview. w3c recommen-
dation.
[100] sheila a. mcilraith and tran cao son. 2002. adapting golog for composition of semantic web services. in 8th int.
conf. on principles of knowledge representation and reasoning (kr ’02) . morgan kaufmann, 482–496.
[101] merics. 2016 (accessed may 26, 2021). made in china 2025. https://merics.org/en/report/made-china-2025.
[102] alexander mertens, sebastian pütz, philipp brauner, florian brillowski et al .2021. human digital shadow: data-based
modeling of users and usage in the internet of production. in 2021 14th int. conf. on human system interaction (hsi
’21). ieee. https://doi.org/10.1109/hsi52170.2021.9538729
[103] richard meyes, hasan tercan, thomas thiele, alexander krämer et al .2018. interdisciplinary data driven production
process analysis for the internet of production. procedia manufacturing 26, 1065–1076. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
promfg.2018.07.143
[104] judith michael, lukas netz, bernhard rumpe, and simon varga. 2019. towards privacy-preserving iot systems
using model driven engineering. in workshop on model-driven engineering for the internet of things (mde4iot ’19) ,
vol. 2442. ceur workshop proceedings, 15–22.
[105] judith michael, bernhard rumpe, and simon varga. 2020. human behavior, goals and model-driven software
engineering for assistive systems. in 10th int. workshop on enterprise modeling and information systems architectures
(emsia ’20) , vol. 2628. ceur workshop proceedings, 11–18.
[106] roberto minerva, gyu myoung lee, and noel crespi. 2020. digital twin in the iot context: a survey on technical
features, scenarios, and architectural models. proc. ieee 108, 10, 1785–1824. https://doi.org/10.1109/jproc.2020.
2998530
[107] dietmar p. f. möller. 2016. digital manufacturing/industry 4.0 . springer, 307–375. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
25178-3_7
[108] michael f. molnar. 2017. the u.s. advanced manufacturing initiative . technical report. nist. https://www.nist.gov/
system/files/documents/2017/04/28/molnar_091211.pdf
[109] benoit montreuil. 2011. toward a physical internet: meeting the global logistics sustainability grand challenge.
logistics research 3, 2, 71–87. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12159-011-0045-x
[110] julian m. müller, johannes w. veile, and kai-ingo voigt. 2020. prerequisites and incentives for digital information
sharing in industry 4.0–an international comparison across data types. computers & industrial engineering 148.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2020.106733
[111] boris otto, sören auer, jan cirullies, jan jürjens et al .2016. industrial data space: digital souvereignity over data .
white paper. fraunhofer. https://doi.org/10.13140/rg.2.1.2673.0649
[112] boris otto and matthias jarke. 2019. designing a multi-sided data platform: findings from the international data
spaces case. electronic markets 29, 4, 561–580. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12525-019-00362-x
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.1:30 brauner et al.
[113] cristina paniagua and jerker delsing. 2020. industrial frameworks for internet of things: a survey. ieee systems
journal 15, 1, 1149–1159. https://doi.org/10.1109/jsyst.2020.2993323
[114] raja parasuraman and victor riley. 1997. humans and automation: use, misuse, disuse, abuse. human factors 39, 2,
230–253. https://doi.org/10.1518/001872097778543886
[115] tobias pauli, erwin fielt, and martin matzner. 2021. digital industrial platforms. business & information systems
engineering 63, 2, 181–190. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-020-00681-w
[116] pieter pauwels and walter terkaj. 2016. express to owl for construction industry: towards a recommendable and
usable ifcowl ontology. automation in construction 63, 100–133. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2015.12.003
[117] jan pennekamp, fritz alder, roman matzutt, jan tobias mühlberg et al .2020. secure end-to-end sensing in supply
chains. in conf. on communications and network security (cns ’20) . ieee. https://doi.org/10.1109/cns48642.2020.
9162337
[118] jan pennekamp, lennart bader, roman matzutt, philipp niemietz et al .2020. private multi-hop accountability
for supply chains. in int. conf. on communications workshops (icc workshops ’20) . ieee. https://doi.org/10.1109/
iccworkshops49005.2020.9145100
[119] jan pennekamp, erik buchholz, yannik lockner, markus dahlmanns et al .2020. privacy-preserving production
process parameter exchange. in 36th annual computer security applications conference (acsac ’20) . acm, 510–525.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3427228.3427248
[120] jan pennekamp, markus dahlmanns, lars gleim, stefan decker, and klaus wehrle. 2019. security considerations for
collaborations in an industrial iot-based lab of labs. in 3rd ieee global conf. on internet of things (gciot ’19) . ieee.
https://doi.org/10.1109/gciot47977.2019.9058413
[121] jan pennekamp, rené glebke, martin henze, tobias meisen et al .2019. towards an infrastructure enabling the
internet of production. in int. conf. on industrial cyber physical systems (icps ’19) . ieee, 31–37. https://doi.org/10.
1109/icphys.2019.8780276
[122] jan pennekamp, martin henze, simo schmidt, philipp niemietz et al .2019. dataflow challenges in an internet
of production: a security & privacy perspective. in acm workshop on cyber-physical systems security & privacy
(cps-spc ’19) . acm, 27–38. https://doi.org/10.1145/3338499.3357357
[123] jan pennekamp, roman matzutt, salil s. kanhere, jens hiller, and klaus wehrle. 2021. the road to accountable and
dependable manufacturing. automation 2, 3, 202–219. https://doi.org/10.3390/automation2030013
[124] jan pennekamp, patrick sapel, ina berenice fink, simon wagner et al .2020. revisiting the privacy needs of real-world
applicable company benchmarking. in 8th workshop on encrypted computing & applied homomorphic cryptography
(wahc ’20) . homomorphicencryption.org, 31–44. https://doi.org/10.25835/0072999
[125] ralf philipsen, philipp brauner, sebastian stiller, simone runge et al .2014. understanding and supporting decision
makers in quality management of production networks . crc press, 94–105.
[126] michael polanyi. 1966. the tacit dimension . university of chicago press.
[127] jinghai rao and xiaomeng su. 2004. a survey of automated web service composition methods. in 1st int. workshop
on semantic web services and web process composition (swswpc ’04) , vol. 3387. springer, 43–54. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-540-30581-1_5
[128] michael riesener, günther schuh, christian dölle, and christian tönnes. 2019. the digital shadow as enabler for
data analytics in product life cycle management. procedia cirp 80, 729–734.
[129] bernhard rumpe. 2017. agile modeling with uml: code generation, testing, refactoring (1st ed.). springer.
[130] bernhard rumpe, katrin hölldobler, and oliver kautz. 2021. monticore language workbench and library handbook:
edition 2021 . shaker.
[131] stuart j. russell and peter norvig. 2009. artificial intelligence: a modern approach (3rd ed.). pearson.
[132] jan rüth, rené glebke, klaus wehrle, vedad causevic, and sandra hirche. 2018. towards in-network industrial
feedback control. in morning workshop on in-network computing (netcompute ’18) . acm, 14–19. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3229591.3229592
[133] filippo santoni de sio and giulio mecacci. 2021. four responsibility gaps with artificial intelligence: why they matter
and how to address them. philosophy & technology 34, 4, 1057–1084. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-021-00450-x
[134] frank schnicke, thomas kuhn, and pablo oliveira antonino. 2020. enabling industry 4.0 service-oriented architecture
through digital twins. in 14th european conf. on software architecture (ecsa ’20) , vol. 1269. springer, 490–503.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-59155-7_35
[135] günther schuh, constantin häfner, christian hopmann, bernhard rumpe et al .2020. effizientere produktion mit
digitalen schatten. zwf zeitschrift für wirtschaftlichen fabrikbetrieb 115, special, 105–107. https://doi.org/10.3139/
104.112339
[136] sculpteo. 2017 (accessed august 31, 2021). digital manufacturing – the factory of the future is here to-
day. https://www.industryweek.com/technology-and-iiot/article/21995642/digital-manufacturing-the-factory-of-
the-future-is-here-today.
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.a computer science perspective on digital transformation in production 1:31
[137] ajit sharma, philip zanotti, and laxmi p. musunur. 2019. enabling the electric future of mobility: robotic automation
for electric vehicle battery assembly. ieee access 7, 170961–170991. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2019.2953712
[138] vladimir a. shekhovtsov, suneth ranasinghe, heinrich c. mayr, and judith michael. 2018. domain specific models
as system links. in advances in conceptual modeling workshops (er ’18) , vol. 11158. springer, 330–340. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_37
[139] julia siderska and khair s. jadaan. 2018. cloud manufacturing: a service-oriented manufacturing paradigm. a review
paper. engineering management in production and services 10, 1, 22–31. https://doi.org/10.1515/emj-2018-0002
[140] emiliano sisinni, abusayeed saifullah, song han, ulf jennehag, and mikael gidlund. 2018. industrial internet of
things: challenges, opportunities, and directions. ieee transactions on industrial informatics 14, 11, 4724– 4734.
https://doi.org/10.1109/tii.2018.2852491
[141] shirin sohrabi, nataliya prokoshyna, and sheila a. mcilraith. 2009. web service composition via the customization
of golog programs with user preferences. in conceptual modeling: foundations and applications , vol. 5600. springer,
319–334. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-02463-4_17
[142] tim stock and günther seliger. 2016. opportunities of sustainable manufacturing in industry 4.0. procedia cirp 40,
536–541. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2016.01.129
[143] fei tao, he zhang, ang liu, and andrew y. c. nee. 2018. digital twin in industry: state-of-the-art. ieee transactions
on industrial informatics 15, 4, 2405–2415. https://doi.org/10.1109/tii.2018.2873186
[144] syed a. m. tofail, elias p. koumoulos, amit bandyopadhyay, susmita bose et al .2018. additive manufacturing:
scientific and technological challenges, market uptake and opportunities. materials today 21, 1, 22–37. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2017.07.001
[145] wil m. p. van der aalst. 2016. process mining: data science in action (2nd ed.). springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-662-49851-4
[146] wil m. p. van der aalst, shengnan guo, and pierre gorissen. 2015. comparative process mining in education: an
approach based on process cubes. in 3rd int. symposium on data-driven process discovery and analysis (simpda ’13) ,
vol. 203. springer, 110–134. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-46436-6_6
[147] birgit vogel-heuser, markus böhm, felix brodeck, katharina kugler et al .2020. interdisciplinary engineering of
cyber-physical production systems: highlighting the benefits of a combined interdisciplinary modelling approach on
the basis of an industrial case. design science 6. https://doi.org/10.1017/dsj.2020.2
[148] markus völter, thomas stahl, jorn bettin, arno haase et al .2013. model-driven software development: technology,
engineering, management . wiley.
[149] jiafu wan, shenglong tang, di li, muhammad imran et al .2019. reconfigurable smart factory for drug packing in
healthcare industry 4.0. ieee transactions on industrial informatics 15, 1, 507–516. https://doi.org/10.1109/tii.2018.
2843811
[150] chris wickens, justin g. hollands, simon banbury, and raja parasuraman. 2013. engineering psychology and human
performance (4th ed.). prentice hall. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ps.27.020176.001513
[151] world economic forum and mckinsey & company. 2021. global lighthouse network: reimagining operations for
growth . white paper. world economic forum.
[152] andreas wortmann, olivier barais, benoit combemale, and manuel wimmer. 2020. modeling languages in industry 4.0:
an extended systematic mapping study. software and systems modeling 19, 1, 67–94. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10270-
019-00757-6
[153] xun xu. 2012. from cloud computing to cloud manufacturing. robotics and computer-integrated manufacturing 28, 1,
75–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcim.2011.07.002
[154] lu zhen. 2012. an analytical study on service-oriented manufacturing strategies. international journal of production
economics 139, 1, 220–228. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2012.04.010
[155] ting zheng, marco ardolino, andrea bacchetti, and marco perona. 2021. the applications of industry 4.0 technologies
in manufacturing context: a systematic literature review. international journal of production research 59, 6, 1922–1954.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2020.1824085
acm trans. internet things, vol. 1, no. 1, article 1. publication date: january 2021.