interactive business process comparison using
conformance and performance insights - a
tool⋆
mahsa pourbafrani1, majid rafiei1, alessandro berti1,2, and wil m.p. van der
aalst1,2
1process and data science group @ rwth aachen, aachen, germany
{mahsa.bafrani, majid.rafiei, a.berti, wvdaalst }@pads.rwth-aachen.de
2fraunhofer institute of technology (fit), sankt augustin, germany
abstract. process mining techniques make the underlying processes in
organizations transparent. historical event data are used to perform con-
formance checking and performance analyses. analyzing a single process
and providing visual insights has been the focus of most process min-
ing techniques. however, comparing two processes or a single process
in different situations is essential for process improvement. different ap-
proaches have been proposed for process comparison. however, most of
the techniques are either relying on the aggregated kpis or their com-
parisons are based on process models, i.e., the flow of activities. existing
techniques are not able to provide understandable and insightful results
for process owners. the current paper describes a tool that provides ag-
gregated and detailed comparisons of two processes starting from their
event logs using innovative visualizations. the visualizations provided by
the tool are interactive. we exploit some techniques recently proposed in
the literature, e.g., stochastic conformance checking and the performance
spectrum , for conformance and performance comparison.
keywords: process mining, event logs, comparison visualization, performance
spectrum, earth mover’s distance
1 introduction
process mining [1] is a branch of data science that analyzes business processes
starting from the information contained in event logs . event logs store the events
executed inside processes w.r.t. time, process instances, activities, and the cor-
responding resources. for instance, in a bank, the act of opening an account
(activity ), for the customer number 123(process instance, or case id ) by john
(resource ), at 01/10/2021 14:00:10 (timestamp ) is considered as an event. the
sequence of events for one process instance ( case id ) w.r.t. their timestamps
⋆funded by the deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft (dfg, german research foundation) under
germany’s excellence strategy – exc 2023 internet of production- project id: 390621612. we
also thank the alexander von humboldt (avh) stiftung for supporting our research.2 m. pourbafrani et al.
visualized interactive process comparison
event log 2event log 1conformance comparison
performance comparisonemd measurement
performance spectrumaggregated
a b
a b
a b
…a b
a ba b…detailedpairwise variant 
comparisonnew /similar 
behavior
aggregated
performance 
kpis
…
……
detailedpreprocessing
event log 1 event log 2event log 1
event log 2
fig. 1: the overview of the proposed tool for comparing two processes using their event logs. after
preprocessing the event logs, two main modules are designed and implemented for detailed and
aggregated comparisons of two processes, w.r.t. behavior and performance similarity. for instance,
using emd (earth mover’s distance ), the cost of mapping one behavior from the first log to the
second one is calculated. using the performance spectrum , the execution times between activities
aandbare compared in two event logs.
is called a case. atrace is the sequence of activities of a case. for instance,
for customer 123(a case), ⟨open account, deposit money, withdraw money, ... ⟩
is the corresponding trace.
several techniques, such as process discovery (the automatic discovery of a
business process model using the event log), conformance checking (the compar-
ison between the behavior of an event log and the corresponding process model),
model enhancement (the annotation of the process model with frequency and
performance information) have been provided in the process mining context.
visualizations often accompany these techniques. for instance, one of the tech-
niques which provides an insightful visualization of event logs is the dotted chart
visualization [17]. such visualizations are the main resources to compare the be-
havior of different processes ( process comparison ) since the analyst can visually
spot the differences. process comparison is also essential to create valid simu-
lation models, and what-if analyses [13]. to compare two processes w.r.t. their
event logs, two significant aspects of the processes can be considered, the control
flow (sequence of activities) and the performance patterns. in this paper, we
focus on these aspects and demonstrate the features and functionalities of our
proposed tool.
we elaborate on the motivation of designing and developing the proposed
tool in section 2. the scientific novelty and features provided by the tool are
introduced in section 3. in section 4, we explain the tool in practice along with
the technical aspects, and section 5 concludes this paper by discussing the future
work and limitations.
2 motivation
in this section, the open issues are highlighted by exploring the related work.
then, the techniques that are used by the proposed tool to address these re-
quirements are briefly explained.visualized process comparsion 3
several approaches have been proposed for the comparison of processes using
their event logs, e.g., in [18], a case study involves resources and activities com-
parisons. in [11], the authors propose a case study for process comparison among
different hospitals with the focus of activity flows. in [2], the idea of process cubes
is presented and applied to compare the processes in the context of education.
then, the results of queries are visualized using standard techniques such as dot-
ted charts. in [4], the authors use process cubes to analyze and compare different
aspects of business processes where they generate multidimensional processes.
however, as discussed in [19], the complexity of considering all the dimensions
and the effort to generate a multidimensional process is high, and it is not easy
to provide an understandable visualization for the user.
most of the current approaches for process comparison are not advanced
enough in both aspects, i.e., conformance checking and performance analysis.
for instance, standard comparison techniques exploit conformance checking be-
tween the event logs and the corresponding process models [5]. in addition, for
performance comparison, general metrics [8] are mainly considered for the com-
parison. although detailed comparison techniques such as using earth mover’s
distance address this issue, e.g., in [10] and [15], there still exists a gap in trans-
forming insights into comprehensive visualizations.
this paper proposes a tool for systematically comparing two processes or
the outcomes of changed processes in different contexts. this tool supports
and complements the existing comparative process mining techniques. we use
a comparison technique for processes that graphically depicts the differences.
two main comparison areas are based on the distance between conformance
and performance of two processes. the proposed tool visualizes the performance
and compliance findings interactively. figure 1 represents an overview of the
proposed tool’s architecture and modules. it includes three main modules, (a)
preprocessing, (b) conformance comparison, and (c) performance comparison.
the conformance comparison is inspired by the distance metrics proposed in [10]
and [15]. for performance analysis, we exploit the idea of performance spectrum
described in [7].
3 approach
the comparison modules provided by our tool use different conformance and
performance analyses initially proposed to analyze a single process. we adapt
them for comparative purposes and create interactive visualizations for such
comparisons. the modules are explained in subsection 3.1 and subsection 3.2.
3.1 conformance comparison
this section explains the provided method for the comparison of the control
flow based on the activities and the paths recorded in the event log. we use
a stochastic conformance checking technique to identify differences. a process
consists of different process instances showing the possible paths that can be4 m. pourbafrani et al.
table 1: an example of emd measurement for two event logs [15]. the reallocation function allocates
1 out of 50 traces ⟨a, b, c, d ⟩inl1to the same trace in l2and 49 traces to the trace ⟨a, e, c, d ⟩which
is the most similar one in l2. the sum of the table’s values indicates the general emd value, i.e.,
the difference between the two event logs.
al1al2⟨a, b, c, d ⟩⟨a, c, b, d ⟩⟨a, e, c, d ⟩49⟨a, e, b, d ⟩49
⟨a, b, c, d ⟩50 1
100×00×0.549
100×0.250×0.5
⟨a, c, b, d ⟩500×0.51
100×00×0.549
100×0.25
taken using the process model. all the possible paths that are unique traces,
i.e., sequences of activities, are considered the process behaviors. given two
event logs l1andl2, we denote al1andal2as their sets of sequences of
activities. given this information, we look for the matches and mismatches from
two viewpoints; aggregated anddetailed :
–aggregated metrics : we consider one of the event logs as a base and
identify the non-existing behavior in another event log. for instance, if
al1={⟨a, b, c⟩,⟨a, b, e, d ⟩}andal2={⟨a, b, c⟩,⟨a, b, e, f ⟩}:
•removed behavior from l1 in comparison with l2:
al1\al2={⟨a, b, e, d ⟩}
•new behavior from l2in comparison with l1:al2\al1={⟨a, b, e, f ⟩}
and the measures|al2\al1|
|al1∪al2|and|al1\al2|
|al1∪al2|are the fraction of the new and
removed behaviors, respectively. the pairwise comparison of the behaviors
of processes and their frequencies, which indicate their importance in each
event log, is also considered. one of the results of these metrics using an
example is shown in figure 2.
–detailed comparison : we use the idea of earth mover’s distance (emd) for
the detailed comparison between traces of two event logs. emd indicates
the amount of effort required to change one pile of earth into the other. we
use the conformance techniques provided in [10] to compute the emd mea-
surement between two event logs. the frequency of each trace is considered
as the pile that needs to be moved, and the normalized edit distance (lev-
enshtein) is used to calculate the distance between every two traces. emd
solves an optimization problem that minimizes the cost of converting one
event log to another one, i.e., it finds the best reallocation function. the
outcome of applying the proposed emd measurement to two sample event
logs is shown in figure 3. the x-axis and y-axis represent the unique traces
in the first event log ( l2) and the unique traces in the second event log ( l1),
respectively. thus, each row is the relative effort that the first unique trace
inl1needs to be transformed into one or more unique traces in l2. the
details of functions and formal definitions are discussed in [13].
3.2 performance comparison
general performance kpis at a high level of aggregation, e.g., the average wait-
ing time of traces, or the average service time are too abstract to be used asvisualized process comparsion 5
fig. 2: the comparative frequency chart represents the similar behaviors, removed behaviors, and
the new behaviors w.r.t. the second event log.
fig. 3: two example event logs are compared in detail. the emd diagram depicts the differences
between the two event logs in terms of the activity flow. for example, the cost of mapping each trace
to the second event log is based on the activities, the order of activities, and the frequency of traces,
i.e., the distance between two logs.
comparison metrics. therefore, besides the usual metrics, we propose the usage
of the performance spectrum [7]. the performance spectrum is a concept intro-
duced to visualize the performance of a process at a detailed level. if we consider
a single path between two activities aandb, the performance spectrum shows all
the temporal segments going from an event having activity ato an event having
activity bin the cases of the event log. this permits to identify the time intervals
with higher/lower performance, the queuing pattern (fifo/lifo), and other
performance patterns that are useful for predictive purposes [6,9].
we use the information of the performance spectrum to calculate statistics for
each segment (namely, the average time and the frequency ) that are compared
between two event logs. figure 4 shows the result of the introduced performance
measurement for two example processes. it represents different aspects of the
results: (1) new/eliminated segments, (2) frequency of each segment, and (3)
duration of each segment. for instance, given l1andl2, each segment’s colors
refer to an event log, the size refers to the average time difference between the
segments, and the transparency indicates the frequency (darker, more frequent).6 m. pourbafrani et al.
fig. 4: part of the performance measurement for the example process is based on the aggregated
performance spectrum. each event log is represented by a different color, i.e., blue for the original
and yellow for the simulated one. overlapping segments are represented by the gray color (same
duration between segments). each point’s transparency and size indicate the frequency and duration
of the segment in the event logs.
the gray color represents the overlapped segment in two event logs with similar
performance metrics, the blue color shows the segments in the original log l1,
and the yellow points represent the new segment existing in l2. the implemen-
tation also includes the option to display only the differences (red points).
4 tool
in this section, we describe the availability, components, and maturity of the
tool.
4.1 availability
the tool is implemented as a web application. the code is publicly available.3
the tool is implemented in python, and the web-based interface has been imple-
mented using flask. by uploading two event logs, the comparison results w.r.t.
different aspects are presented interactively. the process mining insights are on
the basis of [3], [15], and [16]. the tool is also available as a python library,
which makes further extension and integration for different purposes possible.
4.2 components
the tool offers four different components. for the conformance comparison, the
emd comparison tab provides the earth mover’s distance between the traces of
the first event log against the traces of the second event log. with the selection
of the variants, it is possible to focus the visualization on a given set of variants.
the variants frequency comparison tab compares the relative frequencies of
the variants recorded in the first and second log. the overlap between logs tab
3https://github.com/mbafrani/visualcomparison2eventlogsvisualized process comparsion 7
shows how much the behavior between the two logs overlap. finally, the aggre-
gated performance spectrum tab compares the performance of the segments in
the first and the second event logs. in the component, it is possible to visualize
the comparison between the performance, the aggregation of the performance in
the first event log, or the aggregation of the performance in the second one.
4.3 maturity
the authors have used the tool in multiple projects.4for instance, it has been
used for assessing the quality of the simulation results in [14,12]. moreover, a
comparison of production lines with different settings, e.g., removing one of the
stations and introducing concurrency in the process, has been done w.r.t. the
process behaviors as well as performance aspect in the internet of production
project of the rwth aachen university.5
5 conclusion
the goal of process mining techniques is to provide insight into the processes of
organizations. several techniques such as process model discovery, conformance
checking, and social network analysis are proposed to analyze an event log,
while some limitations exist in the comparison between two processes. given the
complexity of the comparison task, such techniques are valuable when the result
is able to be presented comprehensively. this paper proposed innovative and
interactive visualizations to understand the differences between two processes
using their event logs. our approach is implemented as a tool that can be used
with other process mining and comparison techniques to capture the difference.
in the current version, the tool supports comparing the traces of the two event
logs and the performance comparison. as future work, we aim to support process
comparison w.r.t. resources, i.e., social network analysis and roles, and embed
expert knowledge.
references
1. van der aalst, w.m.p.: ”process mining - data science in action”, second edition.
springer (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-49851-4
2. van der aalst, w.m.p., guo, s., gorissen, p.: comparative process mining in ed-
ucation: an approach based on process cubes. in: data-driven process discovery
and analysis. pp. 110–134. springer berlin heidelberg, berlin, heidelberg (2015)
3. berti, a., van zelst, s.j., van der aalst, w.m.p.: process mining for python
(pm4py): bridging the gap between process-and data science. in: proceedings of
the icpm demo track 2019, co-located with 1st international conference on pro-
cess mining (icpm 2019), aachen, germany, june 24-26, 2019. p. 13–16 (2019),
http://ceur-ws.org/vol-2374/
4https://www.researchgate.net/project/forward-looking-in-process-mining
5https://www.iop.rwth-aachen.de8 m. pourbafrani et al.
4. bolt, a., van der aalst, w.m.p.: multidimensional process mining using process
cubes. in: enterprise, business-process and information systems modeling. pp. 102–
116. springer (2015)
5. carmona, j., van dongen, b.f., solti, a., weidlich, m.: conformance checking
- relating processes and models. springer (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-99414-7
6. denisov, v., fahland, d., van der aalst, w.m.p.: predictive performance monitor-
ing of material handling systems using the performance spectrum. in: international
conference on process mining, icpm 2019, aachen, germany, june 24-26, 2019.
pp. 137–144. ieee (2019)
7. denisov, v., fahland, d., van der aalst, w.m.p.: unbiased, fine-grained description
of processes performance from event data. in: business process management. pp.
139–157. springer international publishing (2018)
8. hornix, p.t.: performance analysis of business processes through process mining.
master’s thesis, eindhoven university of technology (2007)
9. klijn, e.l., fahland, d.: performance mining for batch processing using the
performance spectrum. in: francescomarino, c.d., dijkman, r.m., zdun, u.
(eds.) business process management workshops - bpm 2019 international work-
shops, vienna, austria, september 1-6, 2019, revised selected papers. lecture
notes in business information processing, vol. 362, pp. 172–185. springer (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-37453-2 15
10. leemans, s.j.j., syring, a.f., van der aalst, w.m.p.: earth movers’ stochastic
conformance checking. in: bpm forum 2019. pp. 127–143 (2019)
11. partington, a., wynn, m., suriadi, s., ouyang, c., karnon, j.: process mining for
clinical processes: a comparative analysis of four australian hospitals. acm trans.
manage. inf. syst. 5(4) (jan 2015). https://doi.org/10.1145/2629446
12. pourbafrani, m., van der aalst, w.m.p.: gencpn:automatic cpn model generation
of processes. in: 3rd international conference icpm 2021, demo track
13. pourbafrani, m., van der aalst, w.m.p.: interactive process improvement using
simulation of enriched process trees. in: 2nd international workshop on ai-enabled
process automation (2021)
14. pourbafrani, m., jiao, s., van der aalst, w.m.p.: simpt: process improvement
using interactive simulation of time-aware process trees. in: , rcis 2021, pro-
ceedings. lecture notes in business information processing, vol. 415, pp. 588–594.
springer (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-75018-3 40
15. rafiei, m., van der aalst, w.m.p.: towards quantifying privacy in process min-
ing. in: international conference on process mining - icpm (2020), international
workshops. pp. 1–13 (2020)
16. rafiei, m., van der aalst, w.m.p.: group-based privacy preservation
techniques for process mining. data knowl. eng. 134, 101908 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.datak.2021.101908
17. song, m., van der aalst, w.m.p.: supporting process mining by showing events at a
glance. in: proceedings of the 17th annual workshop on information technologies
and systems (wits). pp. 139–145 (2007)
18. syamsiyah, a., bolt, a., cheng, l., hompes, b., r.p., j.c.b., dongen, b., aalst,
w.: business process comparison: a methodology and case study. pp. 253–267 (05
2017)
19. vogelgesang, t., kaes, g., rinderle-ma, s., appelrath, h.j.: multidimensional
process mining: questions, requirements, and limitations. in: caise 2016 forum.
pp. 169–176. caise 2016 forum (june 2016), http://eprints.cs.univie.ac.
at/4689/