80    communications of the acm   |  april 2022  |  vol. 65  |  no. 4big trends
in the mid-1990s, many vendors, such as ibm, staffware,  
filenet, lotus, and xerox, provided workflow 
management (wfm) software. in fact, wfm systems 
were expected to become an integral part of every 
information system. despite these high expectations, 
only a few organizations successfully used this 
technology. after the limited success of wfm systems, 
the scope was broadened beyond automation, 
leading to a wave of business process management 
(bpm) systems.1,7 many organizations documented 
their processes using notations such as the business 
process model notation (bpmn), but few successfully 
used bpm technologies to create information systems 
driven by process models.8 one of the main reasons was 
because traditional process manage -
ment approaches underestimated the 
complexity and variability of real-
world processes and did not explic -
itly use the data available in existing 
enterprise resource planning (erp) 
and customer relationship manage -
ment (crm) systems. although the 
first process-mining algorithms8 were 
developed around the turn of the cen -
tury, large-scale adoption of process 
mining is rather recent. most consid -
ered the wfm/bpm field to be “dead” 
because model-driven approaches did 
not live up to their expectations. how -
ever, the uptake in process mining has 
radically changed this notion over the 
past five years.
according to gartner, there are now 
more than 40 process-mining vendors.4 
last year the market grew 70% and is 
expected to grow 40%–50% each year.4 
celonis is the leading process-mining 
vendor and germany’s first decacorn—
that is, a startup valued at more than 
10 billion usd. most process-mining 
companies are based in europe—for 
example, celonis, lanalabs, signavio, 
mpm, and pafnow from germany; pro -
cessgold, mavim, and fluxicon from the 
netherlands; livejourney from france; 
myinvenio and integris from italy; qpr 
from finland; and minit from slovakia. 
europe’s leadership in this market may 
be explained by the observation that 
most process-mining research has been 
conducted there. given the focus of this 
special section of communications , in 
this article we describe process mining’s 
european roots as well as developments 
in the field. using celonis as an exam -
ple, we show how process mining differs 
from traditional process management 
and automation.
first, we explain the pitfalls of tradi -
tional, purely model-based approaches. 
then, we introduce the field of process 
mining and elaborate on more recent 
developments, where process min -
ing fuels new forms of automation to 
address performance and compliance 
problems. finally, we focus on celonis 
as a successful example of the transfor -european 
leadership 
in process 
managementdoi:10.1145/3511595
by wil van der aalstapril 2022  |  vol. 65  |  no. 4  |  communications of the acm     81big trends      europe region
big trends
mation from academic research into 
one of europe’s most successful it 
companies.
model-driven  
process management
the first prototype office informa -
tion systems were developed in the 
1970s. michael zisman developed 
the scoop system in the context of 
his ph.d. project,10 and skip ellis and 
colleagues at xerox developed the 
officetalk system.2 this was when 
people dreamed of the “office of the 
future”—that is, completely paperless and fully automated procedures.3 the 
vision was that one could generate 
the information systems to support 
processes simply by modeling those 
processes. wfm systems attempt 
to realize this vision. domino was 
the first european wfm system.5 
just like scoop and officetalk, 
domino used petri nets —invented 
by carl adam petri in the 1960s—to 
model processes. several u.s.-based 
researchers picked up on the idea, 
working on both the theory and ap -
plication of petri nets. interestingly, 
the pioneers in the field recognized the importance of concurrency and, 
therefore, used petri nets.
in the 1990s, many wfm products 
followed. many people, including 
myself, expected that wfm systems 
would be used everywhere. however, 
despite a broad choice of products, 
adoption was limited. bpm systems1,7 
extended wfm systems with more 
management and analysis capabili -
ties, but these systems also suffered 
from limited adoption.
between 1975 and 2005, the 
epicenter of process management re -
search gradually shifted from the u.s. image by kapinus m/shutterstock82    communications of the acm   |  april 2022  |  vol. 65  |  no. 4europe region      big trends
logs.8 given a directly-follows complete 
event log generated by simulating a 
structured workflow net, the algorithm 
is guaranteed to produce a behavior -
ally equivalent petri net. the two main 
approaches for conformance checking 
are token-based replay and computing 
alignments  between log and model.8 
in general, process mining-based 
algorithms tend to be very different 
from mainstream data-mining and 
machine-learning approaches.
pain-driven automation
process mining can be used to uncover 
so-called “execution gaps,” where real -
ity is different from what is expected 
or desired. conformance checking can 
be used to diagnose known “execu -
tion gaps,” and process discovery may 
reveal problems nobody was aware 
of. however, to improve the process, 
such “execution gaps” need to trigger 
improvement actions. here automa -
tion again plays a role. as mentioned, 
traditional wfm/bpm technology was 
not very successful. however, one may 
use process mining to target the “ex -
ecution gaps” in the process without 
trying to replace existing systems. un -
necessary rework or repetitive actions 
can be detected and bypassed or done 
automatically. here, low-code integra -
tion platforms make it easy to trigger to europe. moreover, process model -
ing became more popular, and over 
time, the bpmn became the de facto 
standard.1 despite the widespread use 
of bpmn to model operational pro -
cess models, the effect on improving 
processes was limited. one can argue 
that handmade bpmn models often 
have little to do with reality and are not 
taken seriously. trying to implement 
these simplistic models using wfm/
bpm technology is destined to fail. 
therefore, these purely model-driven 
approaches became less popular over 
the last decade.
data-driven  
process management
purely model-driven approaches 
tend to be disconnected from reality; 
process mining aims to address the 
problem. organizations are not inter -
ested in handmade models that do not 
capture a constantly changing reality. i 
was one of the first to witness this, and 
at the end of 1990s, began a systemat -
ic, large-scale effort to learn the actual 
processes using event data. unlike 
earlier approaches, which were either 
not data-driven or not process-centric, 
process mining combines event data 
and explicit process models.
figure 1 provides an overview of 
process mining.8 first, event data is extracted from information systems. 
these may be erp systems, such as 
sap and oracle; crm systems, such 
as salesforce; or custom-made or 
domain-specific systems, such as 
healthcare information systems. each 
event refers to an activity, has a time -
stamp, and may refer to any number 
of objects (orders, customers, items, 
and deliveries). it is often assumed 
that there is a special object, called 
the case, that relates and connects 
the individual events. based on such 
event data, a process model can be 
automatically discovered. the model 
may describe all behavior or just 
mainstream behavior. it can also be 
adapted to describe what should have 
happened. hence, process models 
may be descriptive or normative and 
are connected to event data using 
replay or alignment techniques.8 
through this connection, it is possible 
to diagnose performance and confor -
mance problems. for example, the 
model can be annotated with informa -
tion about deviations and bottleneck 
information. it is also possible to au -
tomatically conduct root-cause analy -
sis and even predict performance and 
conformance problems.
the alpha algorithm , which i devel -
oped, was the first algorithm to dis -
cover concurrent processes from event figure 1. overview of process mining.
discover
information
systems
extrac t
process models
explore
select
ﬁlter
clean
trans formact show
model
adaptshow
interpret
drill down
ml+ +
event dataconf orma nce
performance
diagnosticsalign
replace
enrichapply
comparepredictions
improvementsapril 2022  |  vol. 65  |  no. 4  |  communications of the acm     83big trends      europe region
exactions in existing systems—for 
example, automatically sending an 
email message, redistributing work, 
or executing an sap transaction.
celonis execution  
management system
the celonis execution management 
system (ems) supports all process-
mining capabilities shown in figure 
1. celonis was founded in 2011 by al -
exander rinke, bastian nominacher, 
and martin klenk. they discovered the 
early papers on process mining and 
created a process-mining start-up that 
is widely considered one of europe’s 
most successful young it companies. 
the author is the chief scientist at ce -
lonis and served since 2015 as its chief 
academic advisor.
celonis has 1,800 employees 
and 2,000 customers. some celonis 
installations have more than 5,000 
active users while handling more 
than 500 million cases and 10 billion 
events. the current valuation is 11.1 
billion usd (after obtaining $1 bil -
lion in series d round in june 2021). 
celonis is clearly the market leader 
in process mining.
figure 2 shows a screenshot of 
the celonis ems while discovering a 
process. celonis was the first process-
mining system not focused exclusive -ly on data scientists, but on engaging 
the people who are actually involved 
in the processes. because hundreds 
or even thousands of organizations 
analyze similar processes, it is pos -
sible to prepackage evidence-based 
knowledge. celonis also supports 
action-oriented process mining with 
its embedded low-code integration 
platform, which can support hun -
dreds of applications, including sap, 
oracle, and salesforce. this way, 
process insights can be turned into 
improvement actions.
conclusion
process mining can be viewed as 
“taking x-rays” to uncover known and 
unknown “execution gaps,” while 
automation can be seen as the surgery 
undertaken to address those gaps and 
improve the process in a targeted way. 
classical wfm/bpm approaches can 
be seen as surgery that is performed 
before taking x-rays to diagnose the 
actual problems. the celonis ems 
aims to combine both—that is, using 
process mining to uncover, diagnose, 
and predict performance and com -
pliance problems. these problems 
are subsequently addressed through 
targeted forms of automation.
although most process-mining 
research is conducted in europe, process mining is applied globally, 
and adoption is rapidly growing in 
the u.s. and asia-pacific. for example, 
more than 50% of the fortune 500 
companies are exploring process 
mining. yet, we are just at the begin -
ning, with many opportunities for 
cutting-edge research and innovative 
industrial applications.  
references
1. dumas, m., la rosa, m., mendling, j., and reijers, h. 
fundamentals of business process management.  
springer (2018).
2. ellis, c. and nutt, g. computer science and office 
information systems. computer surveys 12 , 1 (1980), 
26–60.
3. giuliano, v. the office of the future, business week 
(june 30, 1975), 48–70.
4. kerremans, m., srivastava, t., and choudhary, f. 
market guide for process mining. gartner research 
note g00353970 (2021), https://www.gartner.com/en/
documents/3991229/market-guide-for-process-mining.
5. kreifelts, t. domino: ein system zur abwicklung 
arbeitsteiliger vorgänge im büro. angewandte 
informatik 26 , 4 (1984), 137–146.
6. reinkemeyer, l. process mining in action: principles, 
use cases and outlook. springer, berlin (2020).
7. van der aalst, w. business process management: a 
comprehensive survey. isrn software engineering , 
507984 (2013), 1–37.
8. van der aalst, w. process mining: data science in 
action.  springer, berlin (2016).
9. vogelgesang, t. et al. celonis pql: a query language 
for process mining. in process querying methods , 
springer (2021).
10. zisman, m.d. representation, specification and 
automation of office procedures. ph.d. thesis, university 
of pennsylvania, warton school of business (1977).
wil van der aalst  is a professor at rwth aachen 
university, münchen, germany.
copyright held by author/owner.  
publications rights licensed to acm .figure 2. screenshot of the celonis execution management system (ems) while discovering a process model for a purchase-to-pay (p2p) process.
