scaling process mining to turn insights into actions
wil m.p. van der aalst1and josep carmona2
1process and data science (pads), rwth aachen university, germany
wvdaalst@pads.rwth-aachen.de
2universitat polit `ecnica de catalunya, spain
jcarmona@cs.upc.edu
abstract. this final chapter reflects on the current status of the process mining
discipline and provides an outlook on upcoming developments and challenges.
the broader adoption of process mining will be a gradual process. process mining
is already used for high-volume processes in large organizations, but over time
process mining will also become the “new normal” for smaller organizations and
processes with fewer cases. to get the highest return on investment, organizations
need to “scale” their process mining activities. also, from a research point-of-
view, there are many exciting challenges. on the one hand, many of the original
problems (e.g., discovering high-quality process models and scaling conformance
checking) remain (partly) unsolved, still allowing for significant improvements.
on the other hand, the large-scale use of process mining provides many research
opportunities and generates novel scientific questions.
keywords: process mining · execution management · process management
1 process mining: overview and summary
the chapters in this book illustrate the broadness of the process mining discipline. the
interplay between data science and process science provides many challenges and op-
portunities [1]. in this book, we aim to provide a comprehensive overview. there are
many dimensions to characterize the 16 earlier chapters.
–theory-driven versus application-driven.
–backward-looking (e.g., process discovery and conformance checking) versus forward-
looking (e.g., simulation and predictive process analytics).
–simple control-flow-oriented event logs versus complex object-centric event data
considering different types of objects and attributes.
in the first chapter of this book [3], we started with figure 1 showing a 360 degrees
overview of process mining. the subsequent chapters have been focusing on different
parts of the pipeline depicted in figure 1. the initial chapters focused on process dis-
covery, starting with creating a simple directly-follows graph (dfg) followed by a
range of alternative, more sophisticated, techniques. as shown, process discovery is an
important topic, but also very difficult [1]. event data do not contain negative examples
and the positive examples typically only cover a fraction of all possible behaviors. mix-
tures of choice, concurrency, and loops make process discovery a notoriously difficult
task with many trade-offs. also, process models may be used for different purposes.2 wil van der aalst and josep carmona
discover
align
replay
enrich
apply
compare
information 
systems
extract
process 
models
explore
 select
filter
clean
conformance
performance 
diagnostics
predictions
improvements
transform
act
 show
model
adapt
show
interpret
drill down
ml
+
 +
event 
data
fig. 1. process mining uses event data extracted from information systems to provide insights
and transparency that, ultimately, should lead to process improvements (i.e., process redesign,
improved control, and automation).
after discovery, the focus shifted to conformance checking [1, 5]. here the input
consists of both modeled and observed behavior. for example, a multiset of traces is
compared with an accepting petri net. surprisingly, state-of-the-art conformance check-
ing techniques tend to be more demanding than discovery techniques (from a computa-
tional point of view). computing alignments corresponds to solving optimization prob-
lems that grow exponentially in the size of the model and the length of traces in the
event log.
several chapters discussed the importance and complexity of data extraction and
preprocessing. later chapters focused on practical applications and more advanced top-
ics such as model enhancement, streaming process mining, distributed process mining,
and privacy-preserving process-mining techniques.
figure 2 shows another overview of the building blocks of a successful process
mining solution. the top of figure 2 shows examples of application domains where
process mining can be used. in this book, we elaborated on applications in healthcare,
auditing, sales, procurement, and it services. however, process mining is a generic
technology that can be used in any domain.
in the remainder of this concluding chapter, we take a step back and reflect on the
developments in our discipline. section 2 discusses the inevitability of process mining,
but also stresses that concepts such as a digital twin of an organization (dto) are still
far away from being a reality. section 3 explains that it is important to scale process
mining. finally, section 4 provides an outlook also listing research challenges.
2 process mining as the new normal
although process mining has proven its value in many organizations, it is not so easy to
create a convincing business case to justify investments [1]. the reason is that processscaling process mining to turn insights into actions 3
data extraction , loading , and transformation
event data
process 
exploration
process
discovery
conformance 
checking
process 
models
automation 
(e.g. rpa and wfm )
change
management
machine learning /
simulation
healthcare
 logistics
 production
 sales
 finance
insurance
 telecom
 energy
 mobility
 it services
 auditing
procurement
e-learning
fig. 2. process mining can be used in any application domain. however, it may be non-trivial
to extract accurate event data and turn process mining results into actions. change management
and automation play a key role in realizing sustained improvements (as indicated by the two arcs
closing the loop).
mining will most likely reveal performance and compliance problems, but this does not
imply that these are automatically solved [8]. financial and technical debts are well-
known concepts. however, most organizations tend to ignore their operational process
debts (opds). opds cause operational friction, but are difficult to identify and address.
although process mining results are often surprising, they typically reveal opds that
were known to some, but not addressed adequately. making these opds visible and
transparent helps to address them.
in [2], the first author coined the term process hygiene (ph) to stress that process
mining should be the “new normal” not requiring a business case. just like personal
hygiene, one should not expect an immediate return on investment. we know that ac-
tivities such as brushing our teeth, washing our hands after going to the toilet, and
changing clothes are the right thing to do. the same applies to process mining activi-
ties, i.e., process hygiene serves a similar role as personal hygiene. people responsible
for operational processes need to be willing to look at possible problems. objectively
monitoring and analyzing key processes is important for the overall health and well-
being of an organization. process mining helps to ensure process hygiene. not using
process mining reflects the inability or unwillingness to manage processes properly.
fortunately, an increasing number of organizations is aware of this.
although process mining is slowly becoming the “new normal”, most organizations
will notbe able to use the forward-looking forms of process mining. as long as the
extraction of event data, process discovery, and conformance checking are challeng-
ing for an organization, it is unlikely that machine learning and other forward-looking4 wil van der aalst and josep carmona
techniques (including artificial intelligence and simulation) will be of help. terms such
as the digital twin of an organization (dto) illustrate the desire to autonomously
manage, adapt, and improve processes. gartner defines a dto as “a dynamic software
model of any organization that relies on operational and/or other data to understand
how an organization operationalizes its business model, connects with its current state,
responds to changes, deploys resources and delivers exceptional customer value”. cre-
ating a dto can be seen as one of the grand challenges in information systems, just
like autonomous driving in mobility. however, just like the development of self-driving
cars, the process will be slow with many minor incremental improvements.
3 scaling process mining
one of the main conclusions in [6] is that process mining needs scale to be most cost
effective. organizations need to aim for the continuous usage of process mining for
many processes bymany people . initially, process mining was primarily used in process
improvement projects. in such projects, a problematic process is analyzed to provide
recommendations for improvement. since data extraction is often the most problematic
step, such projects often struggle to get results quickly. moreover, the “end product”
of such a project is often a just a report. to improve the process, change management
and automation efforts are still needed. therefore, traditional process mining projects
struggle to realize a good return on investment (roi).
project
project
project
continuous , company -wide project -based
fig. 3. scaling process mining to maximize the benefits.
therefore, process mining should not be seen as a project, but as a continuous
company-wide activity as shown in figure 3. there are several reasons for this.
–if data extraction is done properly, the initial efforts are high, but this can be re-
peated without much extra work. once the data extraction pipeline is realized, it is
possible to continuously produce process mining results based on new event data.
–process mining is a generic technology. hence, investments in software and people
should be spread over many processes and organizational units. for example, an in-
surance company that has multiple products (e.g., different types of insurance) andscaling process mining to turn insights into actions 5
multiple offices (in different countries and cities) should not limit process mining
to one product or one location.
–organizational change often requires commitment from many stakeholders. there-
fore, results should be visible forallinvolved in the process. if performance and
compliance problems are only visible to a small group of experts, it is difficult to
realize durable behavioral changes. many improvement projects fail because peo-
ple slip back into old ways of working after some time.
compare process mining for an organization to creating weather forecasts for a
country. it does not make any sense to create a weather forecast for just one city on a
particular day. investments only make sense if one is able to create a weather forecast
for any city on any day. similarly, process mining is most effective when applied to
many processes continuously.
insights
 actions
fig. 4. turning insights into actions.
as part of scaling process mining, it is essential that insights are turned into con-
crete improvement actions. this is illustrated in figure 4. process discovery and confor-
mance checking can be seen as creating detailed x-ray images to detect problems and
find root causes [1]. however, the value of an x-ray image is limited if it is not followed
by interventions and treatment, e.g., surgery, chemotherapy, diet, and radiation therapy.
therefore, commercial process mining vendors are combining process mining with au-
tomation, e.g., robotic process automation (rpa) and low-code automation platforms
like make.
4 outlook
how will the process mining discipline and market evolve? most analysts expect the
usage of process mining to grow exponentially in the coming years. given the growing
availability of event data and mature tools, there is no reason to doubt this. to predict the
evolution of methods, techniques, and software capabilities, it is good to take another
look at the process mining manifesto [7] written by the ieee task force on process
mining in 2011. the process mining manifesto lists the following eleven challenges.
–c1: finding, merging, and cleaning event data6 wil van der aalst and josep carmona
–c2: dealing with complex event logs having diverse characteristics
–c3: creating representative benchmarks
–c4: dealing with concept drift
–c5: improving the representational bias used for process discovery
–c6: balancing between quality criteria such as fitness, simplicity, precision, and
generalization
–c7: cross-organizational mining
–c8: providing operational support
–c9: combining process mining with other types of analysis
–c10: improving usability for non-experts
–c11: improving understandability for non-experts
there has been substantial progress in the areas covered by these challenges posed
over a decade ago. for example, we now have comprehensive sets of publicly avail-
able benchmarks (c3) and we much better understand the different quality criteria
(c6). thanks to the over 40 commercial process mining tools, it is now much eas-
ier to apply process mining (c10) and understand the diagnostics (c11). due to the
many approaches combining process mining and machine learning, there has been ma-
jor progress with respect to c8 and c9. nevertheless, most of the challenges are still
relevant and even basic problems such as process discovery and conformance checking
have not been completely solved.
discover
align
replay
enrich
apply
compare
information 
systems
extract
process 
models
explore
 select
filter
clean
conformance
performance 
diagnostics
predictions
improvements
transform
act
 show
model
adapt
show
interpret
drill down
ml
+
 +
event 
data12
3finding , extracting , and transforming event data is still 
taking up to 80% of the time .
most techniques focus on a single case notion (i.e., a single 
process ), whereas problems may be caused by interacting or 
competing processes .
process discovery is not a solved problem despite powerful 
techniques like inductive mining . concurrency is hard to 
discover from event data that provide only a sample .
there is a need to better integrate mining and modeling 
(e.g., user -guided discovery ).
conformance checking is time -consuming and diagnostics 
tend to be non -deterministic .
there is a need for techniques recommending process 
changes (i.e., moving beyond diagnostics ).
machine learning (ml) techniques tend to perform poorly 
because essential aspects are missed (e.g., system load ). 
process mining results need to trigger automated actions 
(e.g., start a corrective workflow ).1
2
3
4
5
6
7
845
67
8
fig. 5. process mining challenges in focus in the next five years.
figure 5 annotates the overview diagram with some of most relevant challenges for
the coming years. there is quite some overlap with the eleven challenges in [7]. for ex-
ample, finding, extracting and transforming input data is still one of the main challenges
when applying process mining in practice. approaches such as object-centric process
mining [3, 4] try to make this easier by storing information about multiple objects in a
consistent manner and allowing for process models that are not limited to a single case
notion. figure 5 also shows that there are still many open problems when it comes to
basic capabilities such as process discovery and conformance checking. figure 5 alsoscaling process mining to turn insights into actions 7
lists challenges that were not discussed in [7]. for example, how to better combine
algorithms and domain knowledge to create better process models ( user-guided discov-
ery) and suggest improvements. there is also an increased emphasis on using process
mining results to automatically trigger improvements ( action-oriented process mining ).
we hope that this chapter and book will inspire both academics and practitioners to
work on these important challenges. the process mining discipline is rapidly develop-
ing and there is still room for original and significant contributions.
acknowledgments
funded by the alexander von humboldt (avh) stiftung and the deutsche forschungs-
gemeinschaft (dfg, german research foundation) under germany’s excellence strat-
egy – exc 2023 internet of production – 390621612.
references
1. w.m.p. van der aalst. process mining: data science in action . springer-verlag, berlin, 2016.
2. w.m.p. van der aalst. development of the process mining discipline. in l. reinkemeyer, ed-
itor,process mining in action: principles, use cases and outlook , pages 181–196. springer-
verlag, berlin, 2020.
3. w.m.p. van der aalst. chapter 1 - process mining: a 360 degrees overview. in w.m.p. van
der aalst and j. carmona, editors, process mining handbook , volume ?? of lecture notes in
business information processing , pages ??–?? springer-verlag, berlin, 2022.
4. w.m.p. van der aalst and a. berti. discovering object-centric petri nets. fundamenta
informaticae , 175(1-4):1–40, 2020.
5. j. carmona, b. van dongen, a. solti, and m. weidlich. conformance checking: relating
processes and models . springer-verlag, berlin, 2018.
6. g. galic and m. wolf. global process mining survey 2021: delivering value with
process analytics - adoption and success factors of process mining . deloitte,
2021. https://www2.deloitte.com/de/de/pages/finance/articles/
global-process-mining-survey-2021.html .
7. ieee task force on process mining. process mining manifesto. in f. daniel, k. barkaoui,
and s. dustdar, editors, business process management workshops , volume 99 of lecture
notes in business information processing , pages 169–194. springer-verlag, berlin, 2012.
8. l. reinkemeyer. process mining in action: principles, use cases and outlook . springer-
verlag, berlin, 2020.