 
 
process mining in cscw systems 
 
wil m.p. van der aalst 
department of technology management, eindhoven university of technology,  
p.o. box 513, nl-5600 mb, eindhoven, the netherlands. 
  w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tm.tue.nl  
 
 
abstract 
 
process mining t echni ques al low for ext racting 
information from event l ogs. for example, the audit 
trails of a w orkflow management  system or the 
transact ion logs of  an ent erprise resource pl anning 
system can be used t o discover model s descri bing 
processes, organizations, and products. traditionally, 
process mi ning has been appl ied to structured 
processes. in t his paper, w e argue that process mining 
can also be applied to less st ructured processes 
support ed by c omput er support ed cooperat ive work 
(cscw) syst ems. in addi tion, t he prom framew ork is 
descri bed. usi ng prom a w ide vari ety of  process 
mining activities are supporte d ranging from process 
discovery and verification to conformance checking 
and soci al network anal ysis.  
 
keyw ords:  process m ining, b usiness act ivity 
monitoring, business pro cess intellig ence, cscw , 
data mining. 
 
 
1. introduction 
 
buzzwords such as ba m (bu siness activ ity 
monitoring), b om (business operat ions managem ent), 
bpi (bu siness pro cess in tellig ence) illu strate th e 
interest in closing the bpm loop [2]. this is illustrated 
by figure 1 whi ch shows t he level of support  in four 
different  years usi ng the  bpm lifecycle. the lifecycle 
identifies four di fferent  phases:  process desi gn (i.e., 
making a workfl ow schem a), system conf igurat ion (i.e., 
getting a system to support  the desi gned process), 
process enact ment (i.e., the actual execution of the 
process usi ng t he sy stem), and diagnosi s (i.e., 
extracting knowl edge from  the process as i t has been 
executed). as figure 1 illustrates, bpm technology 
(e.g., workfl ow m anagem ent systems) st arted wi th a 
focus on get ting the system to work (i.e., the system  
confi gurat ion phase) [2] . since t he earl y nineties bpm 
technol ogy matured and m ore em phasi s was put on 
support ing the process desi gn and process enact ment 
phases i n a bet ter way . now m any vendors are trying to 
close t he b pm lifecycle by adding diagnosi s functionality [4 ,5]. th e buzzwo rds bam, bom, bpi, 
etc. illu strate th ese attem pts. 
 
figure 1: t he level of support i s rising 
 
the di agnosi s phase assum es that data is collected in 
the enact ment phase. m ost inform ation sy stems provi de 
some kind of event log  (also referred to as transaction 
log or audit trail). typ ically su ch an event log registers 
the start and/or completion of activ ities. ev ery ev ent 
refers to a case (i.e., proce ss instance) and an activity, 
and, in m ost system s, also a timestam p, a perform er, 
and som e addi tional data. 
process mining techni ques [4,5]  take an event  log as 
a starting poi nt to extract knowl edge, e.g., a m odel of 
the organi zation or t he process. for exam ple, the prom  
fram ework devel oped at  eindhoven uni versity of 
technol ogy provi des a wi de range of process miming 
techni ques.   
this paper di scusses process m ining techni ques, and 
in particular the techni ques support ed by  the prom  
fram ework, i n the cont ext of c omputer support ed 
cooperat ive work (c scw) [11] . the c scw dom ain 
provi des a very  broad range of sy stems that support  
"work" i n all its form s. workflow managem ent (wfm) 
system s and bpm system s can be seen as particular 
cscw  system s aim ing at well-structured office 
processes. in this paper, we expl ore t he appl ication of 
process m ining in the broader c scw dom ain. the goal 
is to trigger new appl ications of process m ining and t o 
define interestin g scien tific an d practical ch allen ges. 
the rem ainder of t he paper is organi zed as follows. 
first, we discuss the cscw  spectrum  of system s. then 
we i ntroduce t he concept  of process mining followed 
1 by an i ntroduct ion to the prom  fram ework. then we 
discusses the appl ication of process m ining in several  
domains of the cscw  spectrum . we use the system s 
staffware (staffware tibco), inconcert (tibco), 
outlook (m icrosoft ), sap r /3 (sap ag), and flow er 
(pallas athena) as concret e exam ples in the wide range 
of cscw  system s that can be used as a st aring poi nt for 
process mining. finally, we di scuss rel ated work and 
concl ude t he paper. 
 
2. cscw spectrum 
 
there ex ists m any definitions of the term comput er 
support ed c ooperat ive work  (cscw ). som e 
emphasi ze the support  of work processes whi le other 
emphasi ze the fact that peopl e work i n groups [11,12] . 
within the cscw  dom ain there has been a constant 
struggl e bet ween t echnol ogical views and sociological 
views. a nice illustration is the so-called "winograd-
suchm an debat e" in the earl y nineties [17,22,24,25] . 
winograd and flores advocat ed the use of a sy stem 
called the "coordinator", a system  based on speech act 
theory (i.e., the language/ action perspect ive) in-between 
e-mail and workfl ow t echnol ogy [24,25] . peopl e like 
suchm an and others argued that such system s are 
undesi rable as t hey "carry  an agenda of discipline and 
control over an organi zation's members" [22] . clearly, 
process mining adds anot her di mension t o this 
discussi on. the goal  of process m ining is not to cont rol 
peopl e. however, it can be used t o monitor and anal yze 
the behavi or of peopl e and organi zations. cleary, such 
technol ogy triggers ethical quest ions. however, such 
quest ions are bey ond t he scope of t his paper. inst ead, 
we want to focus on the applicab ility o f process m ining 
in the broader cont ext of c scw. therefore, we fi rst 
explore the cscw sp ectru m.  
many authors provi de a classification of cscw 
[10,11,12]. th e classical p aper by ellis et al. [1 1] 
classifies groupware sy stems using two taxonom ies: the 
space/tim e taxonom y and the application-level 
taxonom y. the space/time taxonomy  classifies 
interaction into sam e place/ different places and same 
time/different tim es. for exam ple, a face-to-face 
meeting is "sam e place and sam e tim e" interaction 
while the exchange of e-m ails is "different places and 
differen t tim es" in teractio n. th e application-level 
taxonomy  classifies systems based on t he purpose t hey 
serve. 
a later classification give n by ellis distinguishes 
four classes of cscw  system s: (1) keepers, (2) 
coordi nators, (3) c ommunicators, and (4) team -agent s 
[10]. 
keepers  support the access to and m odification of 
shared artifacts. typical i ssues that are of prim ary 
concern to keepers are access control, versioning, 
backup, recovery , and concu rrency  cont rol. exam ples 
of keepers i nclude t he vaul t in a product  dat a 
managem ent (pdm ) system, a reposi tory with drawi ngs in a cad/cam system , and a multi media database 
system . 
coordi nators are concerned wi th the orderi ng and 
synchronizatio n of individual activ ities th at m ake up 
the whol e process. ty pical issues addressed by  
coordi nators are process desi gn, process enact ment, 
enabling of activ ities, an d progress m onitoring. the key 
functionality o f a wo rkflow management system  is 
playing the role of coordi nator. 
communi cators are concerned with explicit 
communicatio n between  particip ants in  collaborative 
endeavors. typical exam ples are electronic m ail 
systems and vi deo conferenci ng sy stems, and basi c 
issues that need to be addressed are m essage passi ng 
(broadcast, m ulticast, etc.),  com munication prot ocols, 
and conversat ion m anagem ent. 
team-agent s are specialized dom ain-specific pieces 
of functionality. a team  agent is typ ically a system  
acting on behal f of a speci fic person or group and 
executing a specific task. exam ples include an 
electronic agenda and a m eeting schedul er.  
the classificatio ns describ ed in literatu re are not 
very meaningful  when consi dering process m ining in 
the context of cscw . mo reover, in literatu re cscw  is 
typically restricted to a sm all class of software product s 
named "groupware" while m ore successful products 
support ing work are excl uded. (si nce the "winograd-
suchm an debate" som e cscw  researchers consider 
workfl ow managem ent software and t he like not  part of 
the cscw spect rum. however, one shoul d real ize that 
widely used software product s rangi ng from  erp to 
crm and cal l-center systems support  workfl ow-like 
functionality.) therefor e, we propose another 
classification based on t wo dimensions as shown in 
figure 2. on the one hand we di stinguish bet ween data 
centric (i.e., the focus is on the sharing and exchange of 
data) and process centric  (i.e., the focus is o n the 
ordering of activ ities) ap proaches/system s. on the other 
hand we  di stinguish bet ween structured  (there is a 
predefi ned way  of deal ing wi th things)  and 
unstructured (things are handl ed in an ad-hoc manner) 
approaches/system s. 
 product ion workfl ow sy stems [2] such as st affware 
(tibco-staffware), m q series w orkflow (ibm ), etc. 
are process centric and s upport structured activities. 
note that these sy stems onl y support  predefi ned 
processes and focus on cont rol-flow rat her than dat a-
flow. ad-hoc workfl ow sy stems such as inconcert  
support unstructured activitie s in a process centric 
manner, i.e., each process instance has a specific 
process model that may be m odified and ext ended on-
the-fly. groupware product s, including e-m ail systems 
such as out look, t ypically  are dat a centric and support  
unstructured activ ities. i.e., th ey are unaware of some 
predefined process. note th at h ere we in terpret 
groupware i n a more narrow sense, and not as broad as 
in [10,11,12] . finally, there is a wi de vari ety of sy stems 
that are data centric wh ile focusi ng on st ructured 
2 processes. a typical exam ple is the erp system  sap 
r/3 which can be viewed  as a set o f applicatio ns built 
on top of a com plex dat abase. part s of sap r /3 are 
process-aware (e.g., the workfl ow m odule webflow), 
but in m ost cases the presen ce of data  enables certain 
activ ities rather than some explicit p rocess m odel. case 
handl ing sy stems such as flow er  (pallas athena) 
support  a m ixture of st ructure and unstructured 
processes usi ng a com bination of a dat a centric and 
process centric approach [7 ]. therefore, they are 
positioned i n the middle of t he cscw spect rum. 
 
 
figure 2: cscw spectrum 
we will u se fig ure 2 to discuss the relev ance of 
process m ining in the cont ext of c scw. however, 
before doing so, we bri efly introduce t he concept  of 
process m ining.  
 
3. process mining: overview  
 
the goal of process m ining is to extract inform ation 
about  processes from  transact ion logs [6] . we assum e 
that it is possible to record  events such that (i) each 
event refers to an activity  (i.e., a wel l-defined st ep in 
the process), (ii) each  event refers to a case  (i.e., a 
process instance), (iii) each event can have a performer  
also referred to as originator (the person execut ing or 
initiatin g the activ ity), an d (iv) events have a timesta mp 
and are t otally ordered [4] . in addi tion event s may have 
associated data (e.g., the out come of a decision). events 
are recorded in a so-called event log .  to get som e idea 
of  the content of an event log consider th e fictiv e log 
shown i n tabl e 1.  
case id activity id  originator  timestamp  
case 1  activity  a  john  9-3-2004:15. 01 
case 2  activity  a  john  9-3-2004:15. 12 
case 3  activity  a  sue  9-3-2004:16. 03 
case 3  activity  d  carol  9-3-2004:16. 07 
case 1  activity  b  mike  9-3-2004:18. 25 
case 1  activity  h  john  10-3-2004:9. 23 
case 2  activity  c  mike  10-3-2004:10. 34 
case 4  activity  a  sue  10-3-2004:10. 35 
case 2  activity  h  john  10-3-2004:12. 34 
case 3  activity  e  pete  10-3-2004:12. 50 
case 3  activity  f  carol  11-3-2004:10. 12 
case 4  activity  d  pete  11-3-2004:10. 14 
case 3  activity  g  sue  11-3-2004:10. 44 
case 3  activity  h  pete  11-3-2004:11. 03 
case 4  activity  f  sue  11-3-2004:11. 18 
case 4  activity  e  clare  11-3-2004:12. 22 
case 4  activity  g  mike  11-3-2004:14. 34 
case 4  activity  h  clare  11-3-2004:14. 38 
table 1: an exampl e of an event l og 
 
as we will sh ow later, lo gs having a stru cture 
similar to the one shown in table 1 are recorded by a 
wide vari ety of c scw systems. thi s inform ation can 
be used t o extract knowl edge. for exam ple, the alpha 
algorithm descri bed in [1,6]  can be used t o deri ve the 
process m odel shown i n figure 3. 
 
ab
dec
fgh
 
figure 3: a process model  deri ved from t able 1 and 
represented in terms of  a petri net 
 
many other t ypes of process mining techni ques 
exist. fo r example, it is possible to extract a social 
network based on an event  log. for m ore det ails we 
refer t o [3] and sect ion 10.  
figure 4 provi des an overvi ew of process mining 
and the various relatio ns between  entities su ch as th e 
inform ation system, operat ional process, event  logs and 
process models. not e that although fi gure 4 i s focusi ng 
on process perspect ive, process mining also includes 
other perspect ives such as the organi zational and dat a 
perspectives [3].  
 
3 information
systemoperation al
process
process
modelsevent
logsmodels
process
mining
confo rmance
testin grecords
configures
delta
analysissupports/
controls
 
figure 4: overvi ew of pro cess mining and related 
topics 
 
figure 4 defi nes process m ining as ext racting a 
model from event logs. this is complemented by delta 
analysis and conform ance testing. delta analysis is used 
to com pare a predefined model (prescriptive or 
descri ptive) and a di scovered m odel. conform ance 
testing is concerned wi th com paring a m odel and an 
event log. this can  be used to investigate th e fitn ess 
and appropri ateness of a m odel. for exam ple, it can be 
used to m easure "alignm ent". 
 
4. prom 
 
after devel oping a wi de variety of mining 
prototypes (e.g., em it, thum b, minson, mimo, etc.)  
we merged our m ining effort s into a si ngle mining 
fram ework: the prom f ramew ork. figure 5 shows a 
glimpse of the archi tecture of prom . it support  different  
systems, file form ats, mining al gorithms, and anal ysis 
techni ques. it  is possi ble to add new (mining) plug-ins 
without changi ng the fram ework. 
 
user
interface
+
user
interactionstaffware
flower
sap
inconcert
...heur istic net
aris graph format
(aris aml format)
pnml
tpn
...
mining
pluginimport
pluginexport
plugin
analysis
pluginconversion
pluginheuristic net pnml
aris graph fo rmat tpn
netminer  file agna file
aris ppm instances dot
comma seperated values …
...
log filt er
visualisation
enginexml log
result
frame
 
figure 5: architecture of prom 
 
current ly more than 30 pl ug-ins have been real ized 
to offer a wid e variety o f process m ining capabilities. 
instead of el aborat ing on t hese pl ug-ins we show some 
resul ts based on t he log shown i n tabl e 1. figure 6 shows t he resul t of appl ying the al pha 
algorithm [1,6]  to the event  log shown in table 1. note 
that indeed the process shown i n figure 3 i s discovered. 
since prom is multi-fo rmat it is also  possible to  
represent  processes i n terms of an epc or any other 
form at added to the fram ework. 
 
 
figure 6: appl ying the al pha plug-in to table 1 
 
figure 7 shows a soci al network [3]  based on t he 
event  log shown in table 1. now nodes represent  actors 
rather than activ ities. 
 
 
figure 7: applying the soci al network miner plug-in 
to table 1 
 
for m ore inform ation on the prom  fram ework or to 
downl oad the t oolset we refer t o 
www.processm ining.org . in t he rem ainder of this paper 
we focus on fives exam ple systems coveri ng the cscw 
spect rum shown i n figure 2. 
 
5. example: staffw are 
 
tibco recently acquired sta ffware and its workflow 
product . staffware i s a cl assical product ion workfl ow 
system  aim ing at h igh-volume h ighly-rep etitive 
processes. therefore, it is a typical candi date of the 
upper-ri ght quadrant  in figure 2 (st ructure – process 
centric). 
figure 8 shows t he process desi gner of st affware. 
like m ost other sy stems in the upper-ri ght quadrant  in 
figure 2, staffware is ab le to generate au dit trails th at 
can be used as i nput for process m ining. 
4  
figure 8: screenshot of staffware designer 
 
figure 9 shows a fragm ent of a st affware log. note 
that the content of the log is sim ilar to  the content of the 
event  log shown i n tabl e 1. therefore, process mining 
tools such as prom  have no probl ems using staffware 
logs as input for process m ining activities. 
 
case 21
diractivedescription    event            user              yyyy/m m/dd hh: mm
--------------- --------- -------- --------- -------- --------- -------- -------- --
start            swdemo@ staffw_e dl2003/02/05 15:0 0
register order           process ed to     swdemo@ staffw_e dl2003/02/05 15:0 0
register order           release d by      swdemo@ staffw_e dl2003/02/05 15:0 0
prepare shipmen t         process ed to     swdemo@ staffw_e dl2003/02/05 15:0 0
(re)send bill            process ed to     swdemo@ staffw_e dl2003/02/05 15:0 0
(re)send bill            release d by      swdemo@ staffw_e dl2003/02/05 15:0 1
receive payment           process ed to swdemo@staffw_e dl2003/02/05 15:0 1
prepare shipmen t         release d by swdemo@staffw_e dl2003/02/05 15:0 1
ship goods               process ed to swdemo@staffw_e dl2003/02/05 15:0 1
ship goods               release d by swdemo@staffw_e dl2003/02/05 15:0 2
receive payment           release d by swdemo@staffw_e dl2003/02/05 15:0 2
archive order            process ed to swdemo@staffw_e dl2003/02/05 15:0 2
archive order            release d by swdemo@staffw_e dl2003/02/05 15:0 2
terminated                         2003/0 2/05 15: 02
case 22
diractivedescription    event            user yyyy/mm/dd hh: mm
--------------- --------- -------- --------- -------- --------- -------- -------- --
start swdemo@staffw_e dl2003/02/05 15:0 2
register order           process ed to swdemo@staffw_e dl2003/02/05 15:0 2
register order           release d by swdemo@staffw_e dl2003/02/05 15:0 2
prepare shipmen t         process ed to swdemo@staffw_e dl2003/02/05 15:0 2  
figure 9: fragment of a staffw are event l og 
 
we have i mplemented a convert or from  staffware 
logs to the xm l form at used by  the prom  fram ework. 
an interestin g observation is th at staffware lo gs the 
offeri ng of work i tems to peopl e and t he com pletion of 
the corresponding activities. however, it does not log 
the actu al start o f an activ ity. as a resu lt, it is not 
possible to measure serv ice tim es an d the utilizatio n of 
the workforce. 
 
6. example: inconcert 
 
inconcert is an ad-hoc work flow system  that is q uite 
different  from  product ion workfl ow systems like 
staffware.  it is one of th e few tools in the lower-right 
quadrant  in figure 2 (unst ructured – process centric). 
as su ch it is an  interestin g tool with  unique capabilities. 
for exam ple, it is possible to create tem plates from  old 
cases and use them  to process new cases. it is also 
possible to adapt a single cas e or t o model a process 
model while executing a case (em erging processes).  
 
figure 10: screenshot of inconcert 
 
figure 10 shows a screenshot  of inc oncert . despi te 
its unique feat ures, t he current  status of the product  is 
unclear. in 1999 tibco acqui red t he tool from  xerox 
and i ntegrated i t into the ti bco b usinessw orks 
platform . in 2004 ti bco al so acqui red staffware 
making it unclear h ow tibco will reco ncile th e various 
workfl ow product s. 
from  a process m ining poi nt of vi ew it is interesting 
that every  case has i ts own process m odel. in prom  we 
embedded special m ining alg orithms ("m ulti-phase 
mining") to mine from instance models rather than audit 
trails. given t he uncl ear fut ure of inc oncert , we did not 
develop an adaptor for inconcert. in stead  the multi-
phase m ining plug-ins can interface with tools such as 
aris ppm. 
 
7. example: outlook  
 
the l ower-l eft quadrant  in figure 2 is more 
heterogeneous. e-m ail program s such as outlook are 
probabl y the m ost widely used soft ware i n this 
quadrant . several  tools are abl e  to const ruct social 
networks fro m e-m ail traffic (e.g ., metasig ht, 
buddy graph, etc.). in t he cont ext of t he prom  
fram ework we have devel oped a t ool to not  only 
generat e a  soci al network [3]  but also process m odels.  
 
 
figure 11: mi ning tool  to generate event l ogs from e-
mail messages 
 
the challen ge of process m ining is to identify the 
case and the task for each event that is recorded. for 
exam ple, given an e-m ail message it is easy to see 
sender, receiver, timestam p, etc. however, if the e-m ail 
5 is a step in som e process, how t o recogni ze the task and 
how to link the e-m ail m essage to a specific case. 
figure 11 shows t he tool we have devel oped t o do such 
things. inform ation such as threads, subject 
inform ation, and speci al annot ations are used t o extract 
meaningful  event  logs. 
 
8. example: sap r/3 
 
the upper-l eft quadrant  in figure 2 is also very 
heterogeneous. sap r /3 is probabl y the most relevant 
product  in this quadrant . in t he cont ext of the prom  
fram ework we have appl ied process m ining techni ques 
to the vari ous l ogs recorded by  sap r/3. at the 
moment we are al so invest igating peopl esoft . 
 
 
figure 12: t ransacti on log in sap r/ 3 obtai ned 
through transaction code st03 
 
sap r/3 provi des m any logs. unfort unately, the 
logs are either at a very de tailed  level or very sp ecific 
for a gi ven process. for exam ple, usi ng t he st03 
transact ion r eport shown i n figure 12, we can inspect  
database transactions. however, these transactions are 
too fi ne-grai ned and do not  point to a case and task. 
sap r /3 also logs docum ent flows whi ch are more at 
the business l evel. unfort unately, one needs t o know 
the relevant tables and the structure of these tables to 
use these docum ent flows. th erefore, sap r/3 can only 
be mined after co nsiderable effo rts. it seem s that this is 
not a limitation of t he concept  of process m ining but a 
resul t of the evol utionary  growt h of sap r /3 resul ting 
in a wi de vari ety of logs. 
 
9. example: flower 
 
tradi tionally, product s have been i n the four 
quadrants shown in figure 2 with the lower-right 
quadrant being nearly em pty. clearly, real life 
processes are a m ixture of structured/ unstructured 
process/data centric activitie s. therefore, som e vendors 
are now aiming at the m iddle of the cscw  spectrum  
shown i n figure 2. thi s is not a trivial pursui t given the trade-offs between t he vari ous requi rements. for 
example, it is d ifficu lt to develop system s that offer a 
lot of support without restri cting flexibility or requiring 
a lot of m odeling effort s. one of t he few t ools that is 
trying to balance bet ween st ructured and unstructured 
activ ities u sing both a process cen tric an d data cen tric 
approach is the case handling system  [7] flow er of 
pallas athena. 
  
 
figure 13: screenshots of both designer and case 
guide of flower 
 
figure 13 shows som e screenshot s of flow er. the 
basic idea of case handling system s like flow er is to 
allow fo r im plicit ro uting, i.e., in  addition to the 
predefined routes there are alternative routes that are 
not modeled explicitly b ut can only be taken provided 
proper authorizatio n. moreover, activ ities m ay overlap 
and are defined in terms of pre- and post -condi tions t o 
allow for more flex ibility. 
we have devel oped an adapt or for flow er in the 
context of the pro m fram ework. one of the interestin g 
properties o f the adaptor is th at it can mine both for 
process-cen tric an d data-cen tric ev ents. th is allo ws a 
more det ailed invest igation into how peopl e actually 
work. the adaptor has been applied with in sev eral 
processes of the uw v, a l arge dut ch organi zation 
taking care of work-rel ated regul ations (e.g. 
unemployment).  
 
10. related w ork 
 
in section 2 we already reviewed relevant cscw  
literatu re. in  this sectio n we focus on process mining 
literatu re. 
 the idea of process mining is not new [4,8,9]  but 
has been m ainly aiming at  the cont rol-flow perspect ive. 
the i dea of appl ying process m ining in the cont ext of 
workfl ow m anagem ent was fi rst introduced i n [8]. this 
work i s based on workfl ow graphs, whi ch are i nspired 
by workfl ow product s such as ibm mqseries 
workflow (form erly known as fl owm ark). cook and 
wolf have investigated similar issu es in the context of 
software engi neeri ng processes. in [9]  they descri be 
three methods for process di scovery : one usi ng neural  
networks, one using a purel y algorithmic approach, and 
6 one markovi an approach. schi mm [20]  has devel oped a 
mining tool suitable for di scoveri ng hi erarchi cally 
structured workfl ow processes. herbst  and karagi annis 
also address t he issue of process m ining in the cont ext 
of workfl ow m anagem ent using an induct ive approach 
[15,14] . they  use st ochast ic task graphs as an 
intermediate rep resentation and generate a workflow 
model descri bed i n the adonis m odeling language. 
most of the approaches have probl ems deal ing wi th 
parallelism  an d noise. ou r wo rk in [1 ,6] is 
characterized by the focus on workfl ow processes wi th 
concurrent  behavi or (rat her t han addi ng ad-hoc 
mechanisms to capture parallelism ). in [23] a heuristic 
approach using rath er sim ple m etrics is used to 
construct so-called "depe ndency -frequency  tables" and 
"dependency -frequency  graphs". these are then used to 
tackle the probl em of noi se. the approaches descri bed 
in [1,6,23]  are based t he al pha al gorithm. process 
mining is not limited to the cont rol-flow perspect ive. 
as shown i n [3], it can al so be used t o discover the 
underl ying soci al network. process m ining in a broader 
sense can be seen as a tool in the context of business 
(process) in tellig ence (bpi). in  [13,19] a bpi to olset on 
top of hp' s process m anager i s descri bed. the b pi 
toolset includes a so-cal led "b pi process m ining 
engi ne". however, t his engi ne does not  provi de any  
techni ques as di scussed before. inst ead i t uses generi c 
mining tools such as sas ent erprise miner for the 
generat ion of deci sion trees rel ating at tributes of cases 
to inform ation about  execut ion pat hs (e.g., durat ion). in 
order to do workfl ow m ining it is conveni ent to have a 
so-cal led "process dat a warehouse" t o store audi t trails. 
such a data warehouse si mplifies and speeds up t he 
queri es needed to deri ve causal  relations. in [18]  zur 
mühlen descri bes t he pisa t ool which can be used t o 
extract perform ance m etrics from  workflow logs. 
similar diagnost ics are provi ded by  the aris process 
perform ance m anager (ppm ) [16] . the later tool is 
commercially av ailab le an d a cust omized versi on of 
ppm is the staffware pro cess m onitor (spm ) [21]  
which is tailo red toward s mining staffware lo gs. note 
that none of t he latter tools is extracting models, i.e., the 
resul ts do not  include control-flow, organi zational or 
social network related di agnost ics. the focus i s 
exclusively on perform ance m etrics. for more 
inform ation on process m ining we refer t o a speci al 
issue of c omputers in indust ry on process mining [5] 
and t he survey  paper [4] . 
 
11. conclusion 
 
 this paper di scussed t he appl ication of process 
mining in the context of the cscw  spectru m. first th e 
spectrum  was classified into  five dom ains (cf. fi gure 
2). then t he topic of process m ining was i ntroduced 
and for each of the five dom ains an exam ple is given.  
we hope that this paper will inspire researchers and 
devel opers t o appl y process m ining in new dom ains. we also encourage people to use the prom fram ework 
as a platform  for such efforts. 
 
acknow ledgements 
 
the author woul d like to thank ton w eijters, 
boudewi jn van dongen, ana karl a alves de m edeiros, 
minseok song, laura m aruster, eri c verbeek, m onique 
jansen-vul lers, hajo r eijers, m ichael  rosemann, huub 
de b eer, pet er van den b rand, anne r ozinat, christian 
günt er, andri y nikolov, w outer kunst , martijn van 
giessel  et al. for t heir on-goi ng work on process m ining 
techni ques. b oudewi jn has been the driving force 
behind prom ,  ana karl a devel oped t he flow er 
adapt er, andri y devel oped t he e-m ail mining t ool, 
wouter and m artijn invest igated the appl ication of 
process m ining to flow er and sap r /3.  w e also 
thank eit for support ing the  devel opment of the prom  
fram ework, cf. www.processm ining.org .  
 
7 references 
[1] w.m.p. van der aalst and b.f. van dongen. discovering 
workflow performance models fro m timed logs. in y. han, 
s. tai, and d. wikarski, editors, international conference on 
engineering and deploy ment of cooperative information 
systems (edcis 2002), volume 2480 of lecture notes in 
computer science, pages 45- 63. springer-verlag, berlin, 
2002. 
[2] w.m.p. van der aalst a nd k.m. van hee. workflow 
management: models, methods, and systems. mit press, 
cambridge, ma, 2002. 
[3] w.m.p. van der aalst a nd m. song. mining social 
networks: uncovering inter action patterns in business 
processes. in j.  desel, b. pernici, and m.  we ske, editors,  
international conference on bu siness proc ess management 
(bpm 2004), volume 3080 of lecture notes in computer 
science, pages 244-260. spri nger-verlag, berlin, 2004. 
[4] w.m.p. van der aa lst, b.f. van donge n, j. herbst, l. 
maruster, g. schim m, and a. j.m.m. w eijters. w orkflow 
mining: a survey  of issues and approaches. data and 
knowledge engineering, 47(2):237-267, 2003. 
[5] w.m.p. van der aalst and a.j.m.m. w eijters, editors. 
process mining, special issue of computers in industry , 
volume 53, number 3. elsevier science publishers, 
amsterdam, 2004. 
[6] w.m.p. van der aalst, a.j.m.m. w eijters, and l. 
maruster. workflow mining: discovering process models 
from  event logs. ieee transac tions on knowledge and data 
engineering, 16(9):1128-1142, 2004. 
[7] w.m.p. van der aalst, m. weske, and d. grünbauer. case 
handling: a new paradigm fo r business process support. 
data and knowledge engin eering, 53(2):129-162, 2005. 
[8] r. agrawal, d. gunopulos , and f. ley mann. mining 
process models from workflow logs. in sixth international 
conference on extending database technology , pages 469-
483, 1998. 
[9] j.e. cook and a.l. wolf. discovering models of software 
processes from event-based data. acm transactions on 
software engineering and methodology , 7(3):215-249, 1998. 
[10] c.a. ellis. an evaluation fram ework for collaborative 
systems. technical report, cu-cs-901-00, university  of 
colorado, department of comput er science, boulder, usa, 
2000. 
[11] c.a. ellis, s.j. gibbs, and g. rein. groupware: som e 
issues and experiences. communications of the acm, 
34(1):38-58, 1991. 
[12] c.a. ellis and g. nutt. w orkflow: the process 
spectrum . in a. s heth, editor, p roceedings  of the ns f 
workshop on workflow and process automation in 
information sy stems, pages 140-145, athens, georgia, may  
1996. 
[13] d. grigori, f. casati,  u. day al, and m.c. shan.  
improving business process quality  through exception 
understanding, prediction, and pr evention. in p . apers , p. 
atzeni, s. ceri, s. paraboschi, k. ramamohana rao, and r. snodgrass, editors, proceedings of 27th international 
conference on very  large data bases (vldb' 01), pages 
159-168. morgan kaufmann, 2001. 
[14] j. herbst. a machine learning approach to workflow 
managem ent. in p roceedings  11th european conference on 
machine learning, volume 1810 of lecture notes in 
computer science, pages 183- 194. springer-verlag, berlin, 
2000. 
[15] j. herbst. ein induktiver ansatz zur akquisition und 
adaption von workflow-modellen. phd thesis, universität 
ulm, november 2001. 
[16] ids scheer. aris process performance manager (aris 
ppm): m easure, analy ze and optim ize your bus iness 
process performance (whitepaper). ids scheer, 
saarbruecken, gemany , http://www.ids-scheer.com, 2002. 
[17] t.w. malone. comment ary on suchman article and 
winograd response. computer supported cooperative work, 
3(1):37-38, 1995. 
[18] m. zur mühlen and m. rosemann. workflow-based 
process monitoring and controlling - technical and 
organizational issues. in r. sprague, editor, p roceedings  of 
the 33rd hawaii international conference on system science 
(hicss-33), pages 1-10. ieee co mputer society  press, los 
alamitos, california, 2000. 
[19] m. sayal, f. casati, u. dayal, and m.c. shan. business 
process cockpit. in p roceedings  of 28th international 
conference on very  large data bases (vldb' 02), pages 
880-883. morgan kaufmann, 2002. 
[20] g. schimm. generic linear business process modeling. 
in s.w. liddle, h.c. may r, and b. thalheim, editors, 
proceedings of the er 2000 w orkshop on conceptual 
approaches for e-business and the world wide web and 
conceptual modeling, volume 1921 of lecture notes in 
computer science, pages 31- 39. springer-verlag, berlin, 
2000. 
[21] staffware. s taffware p rocess m onitor (s pm). 
http://www.staffware.com, 2002. 
[22] l. suchm an. do categories have politics?  the 
language /action perspectiv e reconsidered. computer 
supported cooperative work, 2(3):177-190, 1994. 
[23] a.j.m.m. w eijters and w .m.p. van der aalst. 
rediscovering workflow mode ls from  event-based data 
using little thum b. integrated com puter-aided engineering, 
10(2):151-162, 2003. 
[24] t. winograd. categories, disciplines, and social 
coordination. computer supported cooperative work, 
2(3):191-197, 1994. 
[25] t. winograd and f. flores. understanding computers 
and cognition: a new founda tion for design. ablex, 
norwood, 1986. 
8 