international journal of information management 25 (2005) 458–472
the effectiveness of workﬂow management systems:
predictions and lessons learned
hajo a. reijersa,/c3, wil m.p. van der aalstb
adepartment of technology management, eindhoven university of technology, po box 513, pav. d14,
nl-5600 mb, eindhoven, the netherlands
bdepartment of technology management, eindhoven university of technology, po box 513, pav. d02,
nl-5600 mb, eindhoven, the netherlands
abstract
workﬂow management systems are widely used and reputable to improve organizational performance.
the extent of this effect in practice, however, is not investigated in a quantitative, systematic manner. inthis paper, the preliminary results are reported from a longitudinal, multi-case study into the effectivenessof workﬂow management technology. business process improvement is measured in terms of lead time,service time, wait time, and resource utilization. signiﬁcant improvement of these parameters is predictedfor almost all of the 16 investigated business processes from the six dutch organizations participating inthis study. in addition, this paper includes lessons learned with respect to the simulation of administrative
business processes, data gathering for performance measurement, the nature of administrative business
processes, and workﬂow management implementation projects.r2005 elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.
keywords: workﬂow management; business processes; it effectiveness; simulation
1. introduction
commercial workﬂow management (wfm) systems have been around since the early nineties,
while their conceptual predecessors range back even further, see e.g. ellis (1979) . they havearticle in press
www.elsevier.com/locate/ijinfomgt
0268-4012/$-see front matter r2005 elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2005.06.008/c3corresponding author. tel.: +310402473629; fax +310402432612.
e-mail addresses: h.a.reijers@tm.tue.nl (h.a. reijers), w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tm.tue.nl (w.m.p. van der aalst).become‘‘oneofthemostsuccessfulgenresofsystemssupportingcooperativeworking’’( dourish,
2001). the worldwide wfm market, estimated at $213.6 million in 2002, is expected to redouble
by2008(wintergreen,2003 ).furthermore,wfmfunctionalityhasbeenembeddedbymanyother
contemporary systems, such as erp, crm, and call-center software. wfm technology, in other
words, has become quite successful and widespread.
the alleged advantages of wfm systems are clear. by having a dedicated automated system in
place for the logistic management of a business process, such processes could theoretically be
executedfasterandmoreefﬁciently( lawrence,1997 ).yet,verylittleisknownaboutthe extentof
performance improvement an organization may experience in practice. single case studies are
available, e.g. goebl, messner, & swarzer (2001) ; andprinz & kolvenbach, (1996) , but do not
easily lend themselves for generalization. few empirical studies that include multiple
implementations are known to us. what is more, their focus is not on performance issues, butonaspectssuchastheappreciationofthetechnologybyend-users( kueng,2000 ),implementation
(parkes, 2002 ), or the metamorphosis of the project objectives ( herrmann & hoffmann, 2003 ).
thestudymostrelatedtoourresearchisthatof oba,onada,&komoda(2000) ,whodevelopeda
regression modelon the basis of 20 cases to predict the reduction of lead time as a result of wfm
implementation. other available data on performance improvement comes from wfm vendors,
who are perhaps not completely unbiased. a study among 100 clients of staffware, one of the
world’s largest wfm vendors, indicates for instance that 62.5% of their clients sees increased
efﬁciency as a result of wfm implementation ( staffware, 2000 ). unfortunately, this outcome is
notaccompaniedbyindicationshowthisﬁgureisestablished,howthenotionofefﬁciencyismade
operational or how much efﬁciency gains are achieved.
the lack of information on performance improvement through wfm system is awkward.
despite the large number of research papers on the subject of wfm, the research community has
not been able to express general statements on this subject. this paper is an interim report on a
longitudinal, multi-case study ( yin, 1994 ) into the effectiveness of wfm technology. its aim is to
quantify the contribution of wfm technology to improved business process performance with
respect to lead time, wait time, service time, and utilization of resources. in this way, it is an
extension of the scope of oba et al. (2000) . its ﬁndings may be of relevance for both workﬂow
researchers and practitioners.
ourstudy,whichisconductedinthenetherlands,isajointeffortbyeindhovenuniversityand
deloitte management and ict consultants. it started in 2001 and is planned to continue until2007. so far, six organizations are involved who are in the process of implementing wfm
technology to support 16 different business processes. all organizations are administrative
organizations, both commercial and not-for-proﬁt, ranging from medium-sized to large.
this paper presents the ﬁrst half of our longitudinal study. based on actual measurements of
the process before the introduction of the wfm system and detailed simulations, we present our
expectations on performance improvement for each involved business process for each of the
previously mentioned performance indicators. these expectations serve as a prediction for the
effectiveness of wfm technology, which can be validated when the implementation has been
completed and the wfm-enabled processes are taken into operation. also, the execution of this
study has confronted us with a number of issues that seem worthwhile to communicate. first of
all, the use of discrete event simulation to realistically capture the dynamics of administrativebusiness process turned out to be far more difﬁcult than expected. secondly, we observedarticle in press
h.a. reijers, w.m.p. van der aalst / international journal of information management 25 (2005) 458–472 459characteristicsof the administrativebusiness processes themselves which conﬂicted with both our
intuition and ﬁndings in literature. the same holds for the course that the projects of wfm
implementationtookwithrespecttobusinessprocessredesign(bpr),which—surprisingly—washardly applied. for all these issues, we present the lessons we learned. a ﬁnal objective of this
paper is to present our research methodology and generate feedback from the research
community.
the structure of this paper is as follows. in section 2, we will outline our research design and
identifythefactorsthathaveshapedthedesign.next,wepresentinsection3themostimportant
results from the wfm effectiveness study so far. section 4 summarizes the lessons learned. our
conclusions and outlook are described in the ﬁnal section.
2. research design
2.1. objective
the aim of the effectiveness study is to determine how the performance of the business
processesisaffectedbytheimplementationofwfmtechnology.thefourperformanceindicators
selected to investigate for each involved business process are as follows:
/c15lead time , i.e. the time between the arrival of a case and its completion (also known as cycle
time, completion time, and turnaround time),
/c15service time , i.e. the time spent by resources on the processing of a case,
/c15wait time , i.e. the time a case is idle during its life cycle,
/c15utilization of involved human resources, i.e. the ratio of activity versus their availability.
foreachoftheseindicators,wereportonthe averagevaluesinthispaper.weareawareofthe
importance of other measures, such as service levels and the degree of variance. these measures
have been investigated, but for presentation purposes we focus on averages.
the speciﬁc indicators have been chosen on the basis of a literature review augmented with
ﬁndings from several implementations in which we participated, which showed these to be the
most popularquantitativemetrics ( reijers, 2003 ). by introducingwfmtechnology,onemay aim
to decrease most of the average values of the given performance indicators. because work isrouted by an automated system, work reaches people faster and will not get lost. this decreases
leadtimeandwaittime.itwillallowpeopletospendlesstimeoncoordinationandonthetransfer
of work, which means a decrease of service time. when the supply of work and resources remain
constant, work load and utilization will decrease as a result. therefore, the hypothesis for this
study is that the averages of all four performance indicators will decrease signiﬁcantly as a result
of the use of a wfm system.
notethatnotunderallcircumstancesitisdesirabletoachievealowvaluefor eachperformance
indicator.mostnotably,alowutilizationseemsfavorabletoaccomplishahighlevelofﬂexibility,
butsomemanagerswillratheraimforahighresourceutilizationtofullyexploitthecostspenton
labor.article in press
h.a. reijers, w.m.p. van der aalst / international journal of information management 25 (2005) 458–4724602.2. research steps
to determine the effects on process performance for each single process, at the very least, an
initial measurement of the relevant parameters is required at two moments in time: (a) before the
wfmimplementationand(b)afterwards.inall,threemajorissueshavefurthershapedthedesign
of the research:
(1) the validation of the measurements: how can it be ensured that the collected data on a single
process’ performance is correct?
(2) the prediction ofresults:canwetrytoestimatetheresultsofthewfmtechnologyonaspeciﬁc
process before its actual implementation?
(3) the comparison of the measurements: how can a proper comparison between ex anteand ex
postsituations takes place?
the major steps in the research that address these issues are given in fig. 1. in this ﬁgure,
two axes can be distinguished. on the horizontal axis, we have the situation beforethe
wfm technology implementation on the one hand and the situation afterwards on the other. on
the vertical axis, we distinguish between the realdata on a particular process on the one hand
and the data that follow from a simulation of that process on the other. in the ﬁgure it is
shown that there are six research steps, which take place in the order 0, 1a, 2a, 3, 2b, and 1b.
we will explain these steps in detail and explain how they address the three issues ofvalidation, prediction, and comparison. for now, it seems sufﬁcient to say that the a-
measurements use the initial circumstances, while b-measurements are based on the ﬁnal
circumstances.article in press
fig. 1. research steps.h.a. reijers, w.m.p. van der aalst / international journal of information management 25 (2005) 458–472 461thebasisoftheresearchdesignisformedbygathering realdataontheprocess beforeandafter
the implementation of the wfm systems. we respectively refer to these measurements as the 0-
measurement and the 3-measurement.
toaddresstheissueofvalidation(1),acomputermodelisbuiltofeachbusinessprocesssubject
to the study, both before and after the wfm implementation. we refer to the simulation of the
model of the initial and ﬁnal situation as respectively the 1a-measurement and the 2b-
measurement.bothsimulationmodelsareasrealisticaspossible,includingrealdataontheactual
structure of the business process, the actual arrival of cases, the actual availability of resources,
and the actual routing probabilities of cases ﬂowing through the process, etc. enactment of the
simulation model delivers results on, for example, the lead times of the process and the resource
utilization. thesesimulation resultscan be comparedwith the observationsof the actual process.
for example, the average lead time following from the execution of the simulation model can becompared with lead time averages as observed in practice.
concordanceoftherealandsimulateddatagivessupportforthevalidityofthemeasurements,
either of the initial situation or the situation after the wfm implementation. signiﬁcant
differences between these outcomes may indicate that a part of the process is not understood or
modeled correctly.
toenableprediction(2),weattempttobuildasimulationmodelthatreﬂectsthesituationafter
the implementation of the wfm system (the 2a-measurement). this model is based on the
simulationmodelofthecurrentprocess(usedforthe1a-measurement)andcapturesbothrealistic
and estimated data. on the one hand, it incorporates the aspects of the initial process that
presumably will be the same after implementation. on the other hand, typical effects of wfm
technology are incorporated in it. for example, transportation activities that exist in the currentprocess are eliminated from the model, because wfm technology will take care of transportation
(jablonski & bussler, 1996 ). furthermore, planned initiatives of the organization to e.g. optimize
theprocessstructureorchangetheresourcestafﬁngarealsoincorporatedinthemodelforthe2a-
measurement. in this way, its estimate of the future overall effect is the most realistic. a
comparison between the 1a- and 2a-measurement delivers insights in the expected beneﬁts of the
wfm technology.
theissueofcomparison(3)is slightlymoresophisticated.as weareprimarily interestedinthe
effect of the wfm technology, a straightforward comparison between the initial and ﬁnal
measurement(the0-and3-measurement)isperilous.afterall,variouscontextvariablesmayhavechanged during wfm implementation that affect the ﬁnal measurement. for example, if wfm
technology is implemented while at the same time a staff reduction takes place, the performance
establishedby the 0-and3-measurement maybe similar. itwouldnotbeproper insucha caseto
decidethatwfmtechnologyhasnotmadeanyperformancecontribution.similarly,thesupplyof
work may have changed drastically.
to minimize the effect of these so-called contextual changes, we build a new simulation model
thatisusedforthe1b-measurement.thismodelisderivedfromthe1a-modelthatreﬂectstheinitial
situation. however, all contextual changes which happened during the wfm implementation are
incorporated in the 1b-model as well. in the previous example of staff reduction, this would mean
that the 1b-model includes e.g. the original process structure but a reducednumber of staff
comparedtotheoriginal,initialsituation.acomparisonbetweenthe1band2b-measurementswilltherefore be more meaningful, than a comparison between the 0- and 3-measurement.article in press
h.a. reijers, w.m.p. van der aalst / international journal of information management 25 (2005) 458–472462in summary, the 1a- and 2b-measurements serve as validation for respectively the 0- and 3-
measurement. a comparison between the 1a- and 2a-measurement gives as accurately as possible
an estimation of the effects of wfm technology before implementation, while a comparisonbetweenthe1b-and2b-measurementcanbeusedtodistinguishthenetteffectofwfmtechnology
from other contextual changes.
note that an alternative and at ﬁrst sight simpler research design would involve a large number of
successive measurements during the entire implementation process and continuing for some time
during steady state. in this way, changes in the performance indicators could be attributed more
directlytoexacteventsandsimulationswouldbecomesuperﬂuous.however,thetimeandeffortthat
is required to carry out a full measurement of process performance makes such a design infeasible.
2.3. data gathering and analysis
businessprocessescontainacertainstructureandtheyshowacertainbehavior.forthisstudy,
the most important categories of data to be determined for each business process are as follows:
/c15process: tasks, milestones, business logic, routing probabilities
/c15resource: types of resources, work assignment policies, number and availability of resources
/c15performance : service times, lead times, arrival rate of new cases, work-in-progress, resource
utilization.
for data gathering, the researchers used a multi-method approach ( yin, 1994 ), combining
interviews, existing process descriptions, observations, management reports, self-registrations bypeople involved in the process, and automatically collected data by existinginformationsystems. for
each measurement, a careful consideration has been made for the most suitable mix of instruments.
an important difference between the 0- and 3-measurement with respect to data gathering
concerns the availability of data. wherever possible, the use of existing registrations on the
processingofhistoriccaseswerefavoredoverconductingnew,manualregistrationsforreasonsof
representativity and ease of extraction. for the 0-measurement it was somehow inevitable that
new data collection had to take place, for useful administration of this data within the
organizations was often lacking (see section 4.2). for the 3-measurement, the data gathered by
the wfm system itself is an obvious rich and accessible source of this type of information.
processesweremodeledaspetrinetsusingthecommercialtoolprotos( pallasathena,1997 ).the
tool allows for efﬁcient communication with end-users and the organization’s management, thussimplifying knowledge extraction and validation. protos models were automatically translated to
simulation models, which could be executed and analyzed by the petri-net based simulation tool
exspect ( van hee, somers, & voorhoeve, 1989 ). exspect provides a rich environment for
simulationandanalysis(e.g.conﬁdenceintervals,sensitivityanalysis).formoreinformationonthe
interplay between these tools, the reader is referred to e.g. van der aalst et al. (2000) .
2.4. progress
the workﬂow study started in september 2001 and is expected to continue until at least the
beginningof2007.followingfromthenatureofthistypeofresearch,theenddatacannotbeﬁxedarticle in press
h.a. reijers, w.m.p. van der aalst / international journal of information management 25 (2005) 458–472 463as the 3-measurements are dependent on the progress by the individual organizations on the
implementation of their wfm technology. so far, six dutch organizations have been activelyinvolved in the study. a characterization of these organizations is given in table 1. there is an
equalbalanceofcommercialandnot-for-proﬁtorganizationsinvolvedinthestudy.furthermore,
both intermediate and large organizations are represented. note that the column ‘cases per year’
shows the typical number of cases processed by the largest process under consideration in this
study for that speciﬁc organization. the number of processes studied across all the organizations
totals 16. this approaches the number of case studies involved in the study by oba et al. (2000)
and far exceeds the number of most other collected cases in research papers.
anorganizationcouldparticipateinthestudywhenithadalreadyselectedawfmsystem(butdid
not yet implement it). normally, a wfm selection project involves considerable time and money. we
used the criterion of wfm selection completion as an indicator of both the determination of the
organization to complete the intended implementation and the remaining time to complete theimplementation. the actual wfm systems involved in this study are three commercially available
wfm systems (staffware, cosa, and flower) and one proprietary system (venwfm).
for all listed organizations, the ﬁrst half of the study (0-, 1a-, and 2a-measurement) has now
beencompleted.fortwoofthese, thesecondhalfofthestudyhasbeenalmostcompletedaswell
(1b-, 2b-, and 3- measurement). for two others, the wfm project has been stopped by the
respective organizations. at the same time, three new candidate organizations have applied to
participate in the study for which the study has yet to be initiated (not included in the list).
3. results
a summary of the most important results is given in table 2. the table gives the 1a- and 2a-
measurements of the lead time and service time, as well as the 1a-measurement of the utilization.article in press
table 1
participants in the workﬂow study
organization
numberorganization
descriptionnumber of
employeesturnover/
budget ( /c2
millions h)focus of involved
processes in studynumber of
involved process
in studycases per
year
(/c21000)
1. governmental
agency700 60 (b) debt collection 1 7000
2. health insurer 2300 5200 (t) policy
maintenance7 250
3. regional public
works department1000 250 (b) invoice processing 1 20
4. local
municipality300 210 (b) invoice processing 2 0.7
5. insurance
intermediary5000 29,000 (t) policy
maintenance3 2000
6. domiciliary care
agency1450 50 (t) human resource
management2 1.5h.a. reijers, w.m.p. van der aalst / international journal of information management 25 (2005) 458–472464alsoshownaretheexpectedgainsfromwfmsystemsfortheleadtimeandservicetime,ascanbe
derived from their 1a- and 2-measurements. signiﬁcant changes are accentuated.
for 15 out of 16 business processes (94%), the average lead time is expected to decrease
signiﬁcantly. the gains range from 25% to 83%, with an average of 48%. for process 16,
the measured lead time reduction is not signiﬁcant. note that in this case the initial average
lead time of one and a half day was already very small. for the business process involved,
i.e. the processing of staff illness reports, this ﬁgure may indicate a natural lower bound on the
lead time.
with respect to service time, for 12 out of 16 business processes (75%) a signiﬁcant change is
expected to take place. from these, 11 processes show an expected decrease of service time
between 4% and 47%. however, in the situation of process 5 an increaseof service time is
expectedtotakeplaceof9%.onaverage,anexpecteddecreaseofservicetimeof22%isexpectedfor the 12 processes which expressed signiﬁcant changes.
itisinterestingtotakeacloserlookatprocess5.itinvolvesthehandlingofsimplemutationsof
health insurance policies, such as caused by a change of address. it is the process with the lowest
complexity and the lowest initial average service time value (3.51min). clearly, the overhead
caused by the use of the wfm system—starting the system, registering work to be completed,
etc.—can in this case not be compensated by less coordination work.article in press
table 2
main results study
org. nr. (see
table 1)proc.
nr.lead time service time utilization
1a-meas.
(averagevalue in
days)2a-meas.
(averagevalue in
days)reduction
(%)1a-meas.
(averagevalue in
minutes)2a-meas.
(averagevalue in
minutes)reduction
(%)1a-meas.
(weightedaverage %)
1. 1. 59.1 9.8 83
/c3/c313.45 7.14 47/c3/c373
2. 2. 3.83 2.13 44/c3/c316.01 9.01 44/c3/c368
3. 3.35 1.89 44/c3/c34.16 4.01 4 65
4. 3.40 1.96 42/c3/c38.54 8.14 5/c365
5. 3.76 1.72 54/c3/c33.51 3.84 /c09/c365
6. 4.19 2.31 45/c3/c39.25 8.90 4/c373
7. 3.37 2.01 40/c3/c310.75 8.19 24/c3/c378
8. 3.01 1.83 39/c3/c35.4 3.89 28/c3/c378
3. 9. 16.00 11.93 25/c3/c317.66 17.39 2 4
4. 10. 6.50 1.81 72/c3/c342.00 22.11 47/c3/c33
11. 13.08 6.82 48/c3/c319.45 13.21 32/c3/c336
5. 12. 6.17 4.56 26/c3/c312.13 12.56 /c046 0
13. 5.17 2.34 55/c3/c311.25 11.11 1 67
14. 5.18 2.36 55/c3/c312.06 11.03 9/c3/c396
6. 15. 8.92 5.12 43/c3/c324.19 20.97 13/c3/c323
16. 1.49 1.36 9 13.69 10.72 22/c3/c371
/c3signiﬁcant with two-sided 90% conﬁdence intervals./c3/c3signiﬁcant with two-sided 99% conﬁdence intervals.h.a. reijers, w.m.p. van der aalst / international journal of information management 25 (2005) 458–472 465note that some categories of data are not shown in the table. in this phase of the study, they
can still be derived from the presented data as follows:
/c15the 0-measurements .
allaveragevaluesofthe0-measurementarewithinthe99%conﬁdenceintervalofthevaluesof
the 1a-measurement. in other words, the 1-measurements accurately reﬂect the situation at the
0-measurement.
/c15the 2a-measurement on the utilization .
utilization will change accordingly to the expected change of service time, because an equal
supply of work and workforce is assumed after each wfm implementation.
/c15the measurement on the wait time .
because of the complete lack of concurrency, the wait time in each situation can be accuratelydetermined by subtracting the service time from the lead time. the general relation between
these entities is discussed in e.g. reijers (2003) .
in other words, the effects on utilization are equal to the effects on service time and the effects
on wait time are equal to the effects on lead time. note that in general these equivalences do not
hold.
4. lessons learned
the simulation study provided a detailed analysis of 16 administrative business processes.
althoughthe mainfocusofthe studywastheeffect ofwfmtechnologyonthe fourperformance
indicators described in section 2.1, as a side-effect, we also gained insight in simulating business
processes, gathering data, and structuring administrative business processes. in this section, we
summarize the lessons learned.
4.1. simulation
although simulation has been used since the 1960s and today many mature simulation tools
exist (law & kelton, 1991 ;ross, 1991 ), the case study revealed quite some problems when it
comestomappinganadministrativebusinessprocessontoasimulationmodel.simulationproved
to be an effective validation means revealing many insights, but overall the application of thesimulationtoolturnedouttobemoredifﬁcultthanexpected.thesedifﬁcultieswerenotcausedby
the use of a speciﬁc tool (the combination of protos/exspect in this case), but by some more
fundamental problems when mapping real-life business processes onto a simulation model.
therefore, we brieﬂy discuss four of these generic problems.
theﬁrstproblemconcernsthefactthatasimulationmodeltypicallyfocusesona singleprocess
while the people involved distribute their time over multipleprocesses. this issue is also put forth
insierhuis (2001) where it is stated that the multi-tasking behavior of human resources is often
inadequatelyincorporatedinsimulationmodels.onewaytoaddressthisissueisbynotmodeling
a single process but the entire organization. the drawback is that the distribution of attention
over processes is difﬁcult to model, as it involves e.g. preferences, workload, and rewards.article in press
h.a. reijers, w.m.p. van der aalst / international journal of information management 25 (2005) 458–472466another way to address this problem is to simply focus on a single process and assume limited
availability of resources (i.e., people). for example, if a person works on multiple processes, we
can focus on a single process and abstract from other processes by assuming that the person isonlyavailableforafractionofthetime.theproblemofthelattersolutionisthatpeopletypically
do not spend a pre-speciﬁed fraction of their time on a speciﬁc process. it may be that during a
period someone is working 50% on a process and during another for only 30%.
the second problem is related to the ﬁrst problem in the sense that resources (i.e., people) are
not available allthetime,i.e.,todaymanypeopleworkpart-time.evenifpeopledonotworkpart-
time, they will have lunch breaks, holidays, and days off for training. again, there are basically
two approaches. the ﬁrst one is to lower the number or resources, while the second is to make
resourcestemporarilyunavailable.reducingthenumberofresourcestoreﬂectlimitedavailability
is not as easy as it seems. first of all, it is clear that there is a difference between 5 full-timeresources and 10 half-time resources. although the total number of full-time equivalents (fte’s)
is ﬁve in both cases, the availability patterns are completely different. if there are 10 half-time
resources,theaveragenumberofresourcesisﬁve,butinprincipletheremaybetimesthatnoneof
themistherewhileatothertimes10resourcesareavailable.thisshowsthat5full-timeresources
cannot accurately model 10 half-time resources. second, the average number of available fte’s
does not have to be natural number, e.g., 7 half-time resources would be mapped onto 3.5 full-
timeresources.insuchasituation,onestillhastoaddresstheissuethatresourcesareunavailable
at times. instead of reducing the number of resources, it is also possible to explicitly model the
availability pattern of resources. again this is not as simple as it appears to be. clearly, there is a
difference between a resource that can be used to up to 50% of the time and a resource that is
simply not there for 50% of the time (e.g., only in the afternoons or only at certain days in theweek). the ﬁrst type of resources is clearly much more effective than the second. note that in
reality resources are in-between these two extremes, i.e., resources may be really unavailable at
timesbuttheymayadaptthistocurrentneeds(e.g.,someonepostponeshis‘‘dayoff’’whenthere
is a backlog).
the third problem is the fact that people do not work at a constant speed. in a busy period
peoplecanprocessmorecases.however,ifpeopleareofferedtoomuchworkoveralongerperiod
of time, the performance tends to decrease. (not to mention the effect on quality.) in
psychological literature this effect is known as the yerkes-dodson law, which models the
relationship between arousal, such as work pressure, and human performance as an inverted u-shapedcurve,seee.g. wickens(1992) .so,unlikemachines,humanresources,haveaperformance
that is rather elastic. this elasticity may depend on many circumstances ranging from workload
and rewards to perceived stress and social structures. obviously, it is difﬁcult to model this in a
simulation model in general. a simulation study in a manufacturing job-shop setting that
incorporatesasimple,variablerelationbetweenperformanceandwork-loadturnedouttodeliver
results which were much more in line with empirical observations than previous simulations
(bertrand & van ooijen, 2002 ). it is an open question whether and how these ﬁndings may be
generalized.
the fourth problem is that most business processes are confronted with varying workloads.
there may be seasonal effects inﬂuencing the arrival process of new cases (e.g., an insurance
intermediary and a travel agency will be more busy in december than in october). processchanges also cause unstable workloads. for example, a new law may take some time toarticle in press
h.a. reijers, w.m.p. van der aalst / international journal of information management 25 (2005) 458–472 467implement, thus causing an accumulation of cases. most simulation tools assume a steady-state
process.
we think it is important to point out that the four problems are not so much of a technical
nature. using another simulation tool will not help. however, it would be interesting to think of
newwaysofmodelingthesephenomena.theﬁrstthreeproblemsarerelatedtotheavailabilityof
workers,theﬂexibilityofthisavailability,andtheeffectofvariousworkloadsonthisavailability.
a simple approach to tackle the ﬁrst two problems would be to attach two attributes to each
resource (in addition to standard attributes like role, etc.): (1) availability (a number between 0
and1denotingthepercentageoftimeavailable)and(2) timing elasticity (anumberbetween0and
1 denoting whether the distribution is ﬁxed or depending on needs). note that performance
elasticity(e.g.,thepercentageofadditionalavailabilityorthespeed-upfactorincaseoftoomuch
work) is much more difﬁcult to model since it is necessary to indicate under what circumstancesthe increased performance is available and for how long. the fourth problem is easier to address
by using the real arrival process and feeding this to the simulation. note that this approach does
not allow for one long simulation run which is partitioned into subruns for statistical analysis
(e.g., determining the conﬁdence intervals for all kinds of metrics). this may be a problem for
some tools since most simulation packages assume a steady-state process rather than a transient
process.
4.2. data gathering
for the 3-measurement it is typically possible to gather data from some transaction or event
log. most wfm systems record events such as the start and completion of tasks. using this
information it is possible to analyze the most relevant performance indicators. we have quite
some experience in extracting such information from process logs (see e.g. van der aalst et al.,
2003;van der aalst, weijters, & maruster, 2004 ). recently, many vendors started offering tools
forbusiness process analysis (bpa), cf. sinur (2002) . one of these tools is the aris process
performancemonitor(arisppm)whichcananalyzeandvisualizetheperformanceofworkﬂow
processes based on some event log. unfortunately, the event logs of some wfm products leave
much to be desired. for example, staffware (a wfm system used by several organizations
involved in this project) does not log the start of a task, only its completion. therefore, it is not
possibletodirectlymeasureservicetimesandwaitingtimes.usingsomeheuristicsitispossibleto
approximate these times but the only indicator that can be estimated directly is the lead time.
organization 3 (see table 1) did use a custom-made wfm system. this system suffers from the
same problem, i.e., only the transfer of work from one resource to another is monitored and
therefore the actual start of a task is not measured. again some heuristics and additional
measurements where needed to estimate the actual service time and utilization. despite these
problems, it is relatively easy to gather data. in fact, the logs recorded by wfm systems offer
many opportunities for detailed analysis. see van der aalst and weijters (2004) for a discussion
onprocessmining,i.e.,extractingknowledgeaboutresources,activities,cases,organizations, etc.
from event logs.
gathering data for the 0-measurement is often more problematic. especially in the situation
where paper documents are used rather than electronic documents, typically no or limited
informationonleadtimes, service times, andutilizationis collected.theonly waytoaddressthisarticle in press
h.a. reijers, w.m.p. van der aalst / international journal of information management 25 (2005) 458–472468problemisbyrecordingthemissinginformationbyhand,i.e.,peoplehadtorecordthestarttime
and end time of a task themselves (e.g., on some note attached to the document). clearly, this is
less accurate and it is labor-intensive. in fact, observation inﬂuences the process: it takes time torecord start and end times and people tend to behave differently when being monitored. as a
result, the quality of the data collected from 0-measurements was sometimes questionable. as
much as possible, we used different data sources to cross-check the data. also, we used the 1a-
simulationmodeltoexplorethe consistencybetweenthe variousdata.forexample,self-reported
utilization rates were checked against the utilization rates following from executing a simulation
model which included self-reported service times and automatically gathered arrival rates.
especially for the 0-measurements the available data-gathering period was often shorter than
the usual lead time of a single case. therefore, some heuristics were applied, e.g., instead of
following single cases ﬂow through the process to determine the service time spent on this case,moreoften for each task inthe processitsaverageservicetimewasdetermined.thiswasdoneby
counting a number of executions of the same task yet for different cases.
oneofthelessonslearnedistoconsiderproblemsrelatedtodatagatheringinanearlyphaseof
the project. clearly, it is preferable to collect data automatically and build a process warehouse
(eder, olivotto, & gruber, 2002 ) that can be used for process mining purposes. one of the
advantages of using a wfm system is that it is relatively easy to do this.
4.3. process
an interesting side-effect of this study was that it gave the researchers the opportunity to
examinethecharacteristicsofbusinessprocessesasexecuted,monitored,anddesignedinpractice.
we will highlight some of these insights here.
for each of the organizations, the performance criteria as distinguished in this study were
mentionedastargetedbytheirownwfmimplementation.thispositivelyconﬁrmedourideason
the importance of these notions. additional goals that were mentioned increased service quality,
increased process ﬂexibility, and a better integration of stand-alone applications.
one of the striking observations was that out of the 16 processes considered noneof these
processes incorporated concurrent behavior, i.e. parallel processing of single cases. business
processes turned out to be completely sequential structures. their routing complexity was only
determined by choice constructs and iterations. even more remarkable is that for only one of
these processes the process owners indicated that they considered to put more parallelism in the
processonceitwouldbesupportedbyawfmsystem.thiscontradictswiththeideathatparallelprocessingisanobviousnextstepinimprovingtheperformancewhenadoptingwfmtechnology
(see e.g.vander aalst & van hee, 2002, p. 93 ). one of the explanations may be that processes
allowing for parallelism have already been automated, i.e., the focus on organizations starting
with a wfm system to replace ‘‘paper workﬂows’’ may explain this observation.
onarelatednote,theimplementationofawfmsystemdidnotprovetobeadirectincentiveto
redesign the structure of the business process drastically. without exception, each participating
organizationfavoredintheshorttermthesituationtohaveawfmsystemsupportingthe current
process over a drastically improvedversion of the process. this may be counter-intuitive. one of
thestrengthsofwfmtechnology’sisthatitenablestherestructuringoftheprocessstructure(see
e.g.aversano, canfora, de lucia, & galucci, 2002 ). moreover, automating a ‘‘paper’’ processarticle in press
h.a. reijers, w.m.p. van der aalst / international journal of information management 25 (2005) 458–472 469maynotbethemosteffectivewaytoachievedecreasedleadandservicetimes.ontheotherhand,
this approach decreases the risk of failure by lowering the project’s complexity. therefore, the
selected strategy may be favorable from a change management perspective.
4.4. workﬂow paradox
as indicatedinsection 2.4,twoorganizationsdid notimplementawfmsystem, i.e.,the wfm
project was stopped and we could not conduct a 3-measurement. the same phenomenon and in
an even more intensiﬁed shape has been reported in herrmann and hoffmann (2003) . this study
describes several wfm projects that failed in the sense that the wfm was never actuallyintroduced. nevertheless, the authors note positive effects resulting from at least trying to
introduce such a system. they state the following paradox: ‘‘it is sensible under certain
circumstancestoacceptrequestsforworkﬂowintroductionandtocommencesuchaprojectsince
thismight bethe most promisingway leading toalternative solutions.’’( herrmann&hoffmann,
2003). we partly agree with this workﬂow paradox . however, we think that there are many
organizations where a wfm system is introduced successfully. in the organizations where wfm
projectsarestopped,thedecisionisseldombasedontechnicalproblemsbuttriggeredbypolitical
or short-term ﬁnancial arguments. one of the interesting phenomena we observed is that simply
making a detailed model of the processes is very beneﬁcial to the organization. simulation forcesorganizations to reﬂect on their processes. for example, the insights from the simulation study
conducted in organization 2 resulted in a reduction of staff. this may trigger the conclusion that
it is sufﬁcient to conduct just a simulation study and forget about wfm systems. this conclusion
is not valid for two reasons. first of all, many organizations beneﬁt from the introduction of a
wfmsystem.second,withouttherealprospectofintroducingawfmsystem,thepeopleinvolved
will not take such a study very seriously. in other words, a wfm project is needed to ‘‘shake
things up’’.
5. conclusion and outlook
at this stage of the research, we have indications that wfm systems in general will positively
affect the identiﬁed performance indicators averages. in the large majority of cases we
investigated, service time and utilization are expected to decrease with 22%. for almost all
cases,leadtimeandwaittimeareexpectedtodecreasewithmorethantwicethatamount,namely48%. clearly, it needs to be seen whether these results will be accomplished in practice. on the
basis of an almost completed 3-measurement for organization 3, we are quite conﬁdent that the
actual gains are indeed in the range of the predicted gains.
as a side-effect, this empirical study has proved to be a valuable source of information on
actual business process properties and their execution. also, simulation proved to be a good way
of validating the initial measurements, but a number of challenges had to be faced. we have
addressed directions to counter some of the identiﬁed problems.
unfortunately, we have seen two organizations putting their wfm implementations on hold,
perhaps deﬁnitively. we are still attracting new organizations to get involved in the study to
generate support for general conclusions.article in press
h.a. reijers, w.m.p. van der aalst / international journal of information management 25 (2005) 458–472470currently we are carrying out the ﬁrst two 3-measurements. as part of this work, we are
developingageneraltooltoderivefromtheeventlogsofwfmsystemsperformanceinformation.
we are studyingindustrial solutionsinthisﬁeld, suchas thearisppmandxmldata formats.
we sometimes have the impression that research in the wfm area seems to focus on the aspects of
thetechnologywhicharestillless-than-perfect,e.g.thelimitedcapabilitiestocopewithexceptionsand
the problems associated with straight-jacketing inherently ﬂuid processes in executable form. we do
not deny that these are important areas for further research and improvement. yet, we hope that the
results from this ﬁrst part of our study—as well as from what is to follow—will contribute to a more
balanced and better supported evaluation of the industrial value of wfm technology. after all, if our
predictionswillhold,wfmtechnologyiseffectiveinimprovingprocessperformance,evenwhilethere
may still be things to be desired about these systems.
acknowledgements
the following people from eindhoven university of technology and deloitte have helped in
setting up the research, gathering the data and its analysis: rochelle degens, dick van gorkum,
keesvanhee,harmhoebergen,charonarva ´ez,oscarommert,rene ´theunissen,alexanderin
‘t veld and eric verbeek.
references
van der aalst, w. m. p., de crom,p. j. n.,goverde, r.r. h.m. j., vanhee, k.m., hofman, w. j., reijers, h. a.,
et al. (2000). exspect 6.4: an executable speciﬁcation tool for hierarchical colored petri nets. in m. nielsen, & d.
simpson(eds.), application and theory of petri nets 2000. lecture notes in computer science ,vol.1825(pp.455–464).
berlin: springer.
van der aalst, w. m. p., van dongen, b. f., herbst, j., maruster, l., schimm, g., & weijters, a. j. m. m. (2003).
workﬂow mining: a survey of issues and approaches. data and knowledge engineering ,47(2), 237–267.
vanderaalst,w.m.p.,&vanhee,k.m.(2002). workﬂow management: models, methods, and systems .cambridge:
mit press.
van der aalst, w. m. p., & weijters, a. j. m. m. (2004). process mining: a research agenda. computers in industry ,
53(3), 231–244.
van der aalst, w. m. p., weijters, a. j. m. m., & maruster, l. (2004). workﬂow mining: discovering process models
from event logs. ieee transactions on knowledge and data engineering ,16(9), 1128–1142.
aversano, l., canfora, g., de lucia, a., & galucci, p. (2002). business process reengineering and workﬂow
automation: a technology transfer experience. the journal of systems and software ,63(1), 29–44.
bertrand, j. w. m., & van ooijen, h. p. g. (2002). workload based order release and productivity: a missing link.
production and planning control ,13(7), 665–678.
dourish, p. (2001). process descriptions as organizational accounting devices: the dual use of workﬂow technologies.
in c. a. ellis, & i. zigurs (eds.), proceedings of the acm 2001 international conference on supporting group work
(pp. 52–60). new york: acm press.
eder, j.,olivotto, g.e.,&gruber, w.(2002).adatawarehouseforworkﬂowlogs.iny.han,s.tai,&d.wikarski
(eds.), proceedings of the international conference on engineering and deployment of cooperative information systems
(pp. 1–15). berlin: springer.
ellis, c. a. (1979). information control nets: a mathematical model of ofﬁce information ﬂow. in p. f. roth, & g. j.
nutt (eds.), proceedings of the acm conference on simulation, measurement and modeling of computer systems
(pp. 225–240). new york: acm press.article in press
h.a. reijers, w.m.p. van der aalst / international journal of information management 25 (2005) 458–472 471goebl,w.,messner,k.j.,&swarzer,b.(2001).experiencesinintroducingworkﬂowmanagementinalargeinsurance
group. in j. r. sprague, & h. ralph (eds.), proceedings of the 34th hawaii international conference on system
sciences(p. 9037). washington dc: ieee.
vanhee,k.m.,somers,l.j.,&voorhoeve,m.(1989).executablespeciﬁcationsfordistributedinformationsystems.
ine.d.falkenberg,&p.lindgreen(eds.), proceedings of the ifip tc 8/wg 8.1 working conference on information
system concepts: an in-depth analysis (pp. 139–156). amsterdam: elsevier science.
herrmann, t., & hoffmann, m. (2003). the metamorphoses of workﬂow projects in their early stages. submitted to
cscw—the journal of collaborative computing, 37pp. available at: http://iugsun.cs.uni-dortmund.de:2048/pub/
bscw.cgi/0/208299/30310/30310.pdf .
jablonski, s., & bussler, c. (1996). workﬂow management: modeling concepts, architecture, and implementation .
london: international thomson computer press.
kueng,p.(2000).theeffects ofworkﬂow systemsonorganizations: aqualitativestudy. inw.m.p. vanderaalst,j.
desel, & a. oberweis (eds.), business process management: models, techniques, and empirical studies (pp. 301–316).
berlin: springer.
law, a., & kelton, d. (1991). simulation modeling and analysis . new york: mcgraw-hill.
lawrence, p. (ed.). (1997). workﬂow handbook 1997 . new york: wiley.
oba,m.,onada,s.,komoda,n.(2000).evaluatingthequantitativeeffectsofworkﬂowsystemsbasedonrealcases.in
proceedings of the 33rd hawaii international conference on system sciences , vol. 6 (p. 6031). washington dc: ieee.
pallas athena. (1997). protos user manual . plasmolen: pallas athena bv.
parkes, a. (2002). critical success factors in workﬂow implementation. in t. terrano, & m. d. myers (eds.),
proceedings of the sixth paciﬁc asia conference on information systems (pp. 363–380). tokyo: jasmin.
prinz, w., & kolvenbach, s. (1996). support for workﬂows in a ministerial environment. in m. s. ackerman (ed.),
proceedings of the acm conference on computer supported cooperative work (pp. 199–208). new york: acm press.
reijers, h. a. (2003). design and control of workﬂow processes: business process management for the service industry.
lecture notes in computer science , vol. 2617. berlin: springer.
ross, s. m. (1991). a course in simulation . new york: macmillan.
sierhuis, m. (2001). brahms: a multiagent modeling and simulation language for work system analysis and design . ph.d.
thesis, department of social sciences and informatics, university of amsterdam, amsterdam.
sinur, j. (2002). bpa market catches another major updraft . gartner’s application development and maintenance
research note m-16-8153. gartner, 12 june 2002.
staffware (2000). beneﬁts, progress and competitive edge—the customer’s experience. staffware, maidenhead,
september 2000.
wickens, c. d. (1992). engineering psychology and human performance . new york: harpercollins.
wintergreen. (2003). business process management (bpm) market opportunities, strategies, and forecasts, 2003 to 2008 .
lexington: wintergreen research.
yin, r. k. (1994). case study research, design and methods (2nd ed.). newbury park: sage publications.
hajo reijers isanassistant professor in information systems atthe faculty oftechnology management ofeindhoven
university of technology. he is also a staff member of the process management research center, babson college.
previously, he has worked for several management consultancy ﬁrms, most recently as a manager with deloitte. hismain interests are business process redesign, information systems, workﬂow management systems, petri nets, and
simulation.
wil van der aalst is a full professor of information systems and head of the information systems department of the
facultyoftechnologymanagement ateindhovenuniversityoftechnology.currentlyheisalsoanadjunctprofessorat queensland university of technology (qut) working within the centre for information technology innovation
(citi). his research interests include information systems, simulation, process mining, petri nets, process models,
workﬂow management systems, veriﬁcation techniques, enterprise resource planning systems, computer supportedcooperative work, and interorganizational business processes.article in press
h.a. reijers, w.m.p. van der aalst / international journal of information management 25 (2005) 458–472472