guest editorial
business process management: where business
processes and web services meet
wil m.p. van der aalst1, boualem benatallah2, fabio casati3, francisco
curbera4, and eric verbeek1
1department of information systems
eindhoven university of technology, the netherlands
fw.m.p.v.d.aalst,h.m.w.verbeek g@tm.tue.nl
2school of computer science and engineering
university of new south wales, sydney, australia
boualem@cse.unsw.edu.au
3intelligent enterprise technology lab
hp laboratories, palo alto, usa
fabio.casati@hp.com
4ibm watson research center
ibm research, hawthorne, new york, usa
curbera@us.ibm.com
abstract. business process management (bpm) includes methods, tech-
niques, and tools to support the design, enactment, management, and
analysis of operational business processes. this special issue presents pa-
pers, which contribute to the state of the art of bpm, and should be
considered as a spin-o® of the successful 2005 edition of international
conference on business process management. in this guest editorial we
introduce the four papers in this special issue and comment on recent
developments in the broader bpm domain.
key words : business process management, work°ow management, process-aware
information systems, web services.
1 introduction
over the last 15 years there has been a shift from \data-aware" information sys-
tems to \process-aware" information systems. to support business processes, an
enterprise information system needs to be aware of these processes and their or-
ganizational context [2, 7, 6]. hence, research on business process management
(bpm) has been focusing on systems that are driven by explicit process de-
signs to enact and manage operational business processes. such process-aware
information systems (paiss) allow for the modi¯cation of processes without
changing the system itself (i.e., by recon¯guration). traditionally, the process
designs driving these systems are graphical and the focus is on structured pro-
cesses that need to handle many cases. bpm can be considered as an extension
of classical work°ow management (wfm) systems and approaches.paiss can be classi¯ed into human-oriented and system-oriented. more pre-
cisely, paiss may support person-to-person (p2p), person-to-application (p2a),
and/or application-to-application (a2a) processes. in p2p processes the par-
ticipants involved are primarily people, i.e. the processes primarily involve tasks
which require human intervention. job tracking, video-conferencing, project man-
agement, and groupware tools are designed to support p2p processes. at the
other end of the spectrum, a2a processes are those that only involve tasks per-
formed by software systems. transaction processing systems, eai platforms, and
web-based integration servers are designed to support a2a processes. p2a pro-
cesses are those that involve both human tasks and interactions between people,
and tasks and interactions involving applications which act without human in-
tervention. work°ow systems fall in the p2a category since they primarily aim
at making people and applications work in an integrated manner.
within the bpm domain more and more researchers are focusing on vari-
ous types of analysis . classically, researchers have been focusing on veri¯cation
and performance analysis based on process designs, i.e., models are analyzed
before the corresponding processes are put into production. interestingly, more
and more work is being done on process mining and business process intelli-
gence, i.e., on the analysis of business processes while they are being enacted,
cf. www.processmining.org.
this special issue is based on the third international conference on busi-
ness process management (bpm 2005), organized by loria in nancy, france,
september 5-8, 2005. the interest in business process management (and in the
bpm conference series) was demonstrated by the quantity and quality of the
paper submissions to bpm 2005. we received over 176 contributions from 31
countries. of these 176 papers, 25 were accepted as full papers (20 research
papers and 5 industrial papers) for the conference. moreover, 17 contributions
were accepted as short papers [1]. the authors of the best papers were invited to
submit an extended version to this special issue of dke. finally, after a careful
selection and further revisions, we accepted the four papers included in this vol-
ume, i.e., of the 176 papers submitted, only four papers were selected after the
various selection and reviewing rounds. in the remainder, we brie°y introduce
these four papers. however, before doing so, we would like to comment on the
relationship between business processes and web services.
2 business processes and web services
many papers presented at bpm 2005 focused on business processes and web
services. therefore, we would like to elaborate on relevance of web services for
the bpm community.
web services, an emerging paradigm for architecting and implementing busi-
ness collaborations within and across organizational boundaries, are currently of
interest to both software vendors and scientists [3]. in this paradigm, the func-
tionality provided by business applications is encapsulated within web services:
software components described at a semantic level, which can be invoked byapplication programs or by other services through a stack of internet standards
including http, xml, soap, wsdl and uddi. once deployed, web services
provided by various organizations can be inter-connected in order to implement
business collaborations, leading to composite web services (i.e., service choreog-
raphy and orchestration).
today work°ow management systems are readily available [2, 7] and work°ow
technology is hidden in many applications, e.g., erp, crm, and pdm systems.
however, their application is still limited to speci¯c industries such as banking
and insurance. since 2000 there has been a growing interest in web services.
this resulted in a stack of internet standards (http, xml, soap, wsdl, and
uddi) which needed to be complemented by a process layer. initially, several
vendors proposed competing languages, e.g., ibm proposed wsfl (web ser-
vices flow language) building on flowmark/mqseries and microsoft proposed
xlang (web services for business process design) building on biztalk. how-
ever, in recent years bpel [4] emerged as a compromise between both languages.
the business process execution language for web services (bpel4ws,
or bpel for short) has become the de-facto standard for implementing pro-
cesses based on web services [4]. systems such as oracle bpel process man-
ager, ibm websphere application server enterprise, ibm websphere studio
application developer integration edition, and microsoft biztalk server 2004
support bpel. also organizations such as sap support bpel, thus illustrat-
ing the practical relevance of this language. although intended as a language
for connecting web services, its application is not limited to cross-organizational
processes. it is expected that in the near future a wide variety of paiss [5] will
be realized using bpel. whilst being a powerful language, bpel is di±cult to
use. its xml representation is very verbose and only readable to the trained
eye. it o®ers many constructs and typically things can be implemented in many
ways, e.g., using links and the °ow construct or using sequences and switches.
as a result only experienced users are able to select the right construct. sev-
eral vendors o®er a graphical interface that generates bpel code. however, the
graphical representations are a direct re°ection of the bpel code and are not
intuitive to end-users. therefore, bpel is closer to classical programming lan-
guages than e.g. the more user-friendly work°ow management systems available
today. both the software industry and researchers are working on mappings from
more intuitive languages to bpel.
in discussions, petri nets [9] and pi calculus [8] are often mentioned as two
possible formal languages that could serve as a basis for languages such as bpel.
some vendors claim that their systems are based on petri nets or pi calculus
and other vendors suggest that they do not need a formal language to base their
system on. in essence there are three \camps" in these discussions: the \petri
net camp", the \pi calculus" (or process algebra) camp, and the \practition-
ers camp" (also known as the \no formalism camp"). this was the reason for
starting the \petri nets and pi calculus for business processes" working group
(process-modelling-group.org) in june 2004. two years later the debate is still
ongoing and it seems unrealistic that consensus on a single language will bereached. however, it is clear that web services and languages like bpel are
highly relevant for the bpm community as is re°ected by the papers in the
proceedings of bpm 2005 [1].
3 papers in this special issue
as indicated in the introduction, this special issue contains four extended ver-
sions of papers presented at bpm 2005.
tore fjellheim, stephen milliner, marlon dumas, and julien vayssiere re-
port on a process-based methodology for designing event-based mobile compos-
ite applications. starting point for their work is the observation that application
developers should be able to specify how applications can adapt to changing
conditions, and to later recon¯gure the application to suit new circumstances.
the paper describes a methodology that combines the comprehensibility and
manageability of control from process-oriented methodologies, with the °exi-
bility of event-based communication. this enables a ¯ne-grained adaptation of
process-oriented applications.
rania khalaf presents an approach to go from rosettanet pips to bpel pro-
cesses. rosettanet partner interface processes (pips) are mapped onto bpel
using a three-level approach. this is done to address the situation where business
protocols in n-party interactions require centralized protocol design but decen-
tralized execution without the intervention of the designing party. the general
motivation for mapping pips to bpel is two-fold. first, it enables de¯ning
the message °ows in pips in a standardized, portable, inter-operable manner.
second, pips currently have no way to factor in the interaction with back-end
systems to reach an executable.
richard lenz and manfred reichert focus in their paper on it support for
health-care processes. clearly, the health-care domain is an interesting appli-
cation area for paiss. though health-care processes frequently change, and
therefore the separation of the °ow logic from the application code seems to
be promising, work°ow technology has not yet been broadly used in health-
care environments. therefore, lenz and reichert elaborate on the potential and
the essential limitations of it support for health-care processes using a broad
sociotechnical perspective. moreover, they indicate how advanced process man-
agement technology can improve the current situation.
kees van hee, alexander serebrenik, natalia sidorova, marc voorhoeve, and
jan van der wal present new results on the resource management in the context
of work°ow nets, a special class of petri nets. the authors present a scheduling-
free resource management policy, i.e. the policy when a resource request may be
granted whenever enough resources are available to satisfy the request. a busi-
ness process consisting of any number of cases and working under the scheduling-
free resource management policy is guaranteed to terminate properly if certain
conditions are met. the paper also investigates the scheduling of resources based
on solidi¯cation using an iterative simulation-based approach. an example in-
spired by the construction industry is used to illustrate the approach.references
1.w.m.p. van der aalst, b. benatallah, f. casati, and f. curbera, editors. interna-
tional conference on business process management (bpm 2005) , volume 3649 of
lecture notes in computer science . springer-verlag, berlin, 2005.
2.w.m.p. van der aalst and k.m. van hee. work°ow management: models, methods,
and systems . mit press, cambridge, ma, 2004.
3.g. alonso, f. casati, h. kuno, and v. machiraju. web services concepts, archi-
tectures and applications . springer-verlag, berlin, 2004.
4.t. andrews, f. curbera, h. dholakia, y. goland, j. klein, f. leymann, k. liu,
d. roller, d. smith, s. thatte, i. trickovic, and s. weerawarana. business process
execution language for web services, version 1.1. standards proposal by bea
systems, international business machines corporation, and microsoft corporation,
2003.
5.m. dumas, w.m.p. van der aalst, and a.h.m. ter hofstede. process-aware infor-
mation systems: bridging people and software through process technology . wiley
& sons, 2005.
6.d. georgakopoulos, m. hornick, and a. sheth. an overview of work°ow manage-
ment: from process modeling to work°ow automation infrastructure. distributed
and parallel databases , 3:119{153, 1995.
7.f. leymann and d. roller. production work°ow: concepts and techniques .
prentice-hall ptr, upper saddle river, new jersey, usa, 1999.
8.r. milner. communicating and mobile systems: the pi-calculus . cambridge uni-
versity press, cambridge, uk, 1999.
9.w. reisig and g. rozenberg, editors. lectures on petri nets i: basic models , volume
1491 of lecture notes in computer science . springer-verlag, berlin, 1998.