workflow management syst ems for grid computing  
 
by carmen bratosin and wil van der aalst  
 
 
the group architecture for information systems from the technische universiteit eindhoven 
(tu/e) in the netherlands built up extensive kn owledge in the field of workflow management 
systems and process mining. starting in 2006, the gr oup is trying to apply this knowledge in a new 
and dynamic research area: grid computing. four research perspectives are currently under 
investigation.  
 
software systems are getting more and more complex. to cope with their complexity, one often 
divides a system in a number of autonomous components whose work is coordinated. 
component and service coordinatio n is one of the main challenges in software engineering. two 
important application fields of coordination are grid computing and workflow management. grid 
computing is mostly used in computational sc ience while workflow management is used for 
business applications. therefore, we try to bridge the gap between these areas in order to make further progress in both of them. 
over the last decade we have gathered much  experience in process modeling, analysis and 
enactment. our workflow patterns have become a standard way to evaluate languages and the 
workflow management system ya wl is one of the most expre ssive and mature open-source 
workflow systems available today. moreover, we  have been specializing in process analysis. 
using petri nets as a theoretical foundation, we have been able to  analyze a variety of real-life 
process models ranging from bpel and workflow  specifications to the entire sap reference 
model. in recent years, we focused on the analysis  of processes based on system logs. the prom 
framework developed at tu/e provides a versatile toolset for process mining, which seems to be particularly useful in a grid environment.  
so far the grid computing community focused more  on the infrastructure. grid software has been 
designed that allows users to s ubmit their ‘problems’ to the gri d. less work has been done to 
model such a problem in an efficient way. also, in most applications the correctness properties 
rest in the hands of the user.  
therefore, we are applying our knowledge rela ted to petri net modeling and analysis, the 
workflow patterns, process mining, and concrete workflow technology to grids. we are doing 
research in the following areas: 
(a) grid modeling 
many definitions exist of grids and often techno logical aspects and hyped terms are hiding the 
essence of grids. therefore, we use a mixt ure of petri nets and uml modeling to build 
formal/conceptual models for grid compu ting. here we emphasize the link between the 
distributed nature of grids (where  resources play an important role) and workflow processes. the 
main purpose is to formalize the concept of a grid and fix a particular interpretation while 
highlighting the interesti ng research questions.  
(b) analyzing grid models 
using petri-net-based techniques, we analyze diffe rent mechanisms used in grid workflows. the 
goal is to transfer correctness not ions such as soundness to grid workflows. also, we try to find 
new properties based on the specific grid behavior (e.g. multiple instances of the same process, 
resource allocation, and di stributed management).  
(c) analyzing grid logs 
in a grid environment many events  are logged and the perf ormance of the system is of the utmost 
importance. therefore, it is interesting to appl y process mining techniques in this domain. this 
assists in the configuration of gr ids and may be used for the on-the -fly optimization of processes. (d) build ing a process -aware grid in frastruc ture 
using com bination of globus, yawl, and prom we  want to realize a more “process-aware” 
grid. by linking a fundam ental enabling technology for the grids (globus) to a powerful process  
engine (ya wl) and state-of-the-a rt analys is too ls (prom),  we obt ain an interesting environm ent 
for experim entation. 
 
 
the diagram  above illustrates the scope of the project. on  the one hand, we analyze grid s by 
modeling th em in terms of  petri n ets. sim ilar models are used for the configuration of the 
process-perspective of grid m iddleware (in ou r case a m ixture of globus and yawl). on the 
other hand, we collect event logs via the m iddlew are layer and use this f or process m ining. we  
use these event logs for process discovery (i.e ., autom atically deriving models by observing the  
grid), for co nformance checking (to check wheth er “the grid” behaving as expected), and m odel 
extension (e.g., to project perform ance indicators onto a process m odel).   
 
all of the aspects shown in the diagram have exte nsive ly inv estigated in the contex t of workf low 
manage ment system s and service oriented archit ectures using bpel engines. for exam ple, we  
have been doing conform ance te sting in the con text of  orac le bpel and process discovery and 
process verification in the context ibm w ebsphere. w e have also evaluated m any process 
engines using the so-called work flow patterns and provided sem antics and analysis technique s 
for process modeling languages ranging from  bpel and yaw l to bpmn and epcs.  the next 
step is to apply this in a grid environm ent using both globus and yawl. 
 
the research is supported by neth erlands organization for scien tific research (n ow) in the 
context of project workflow management for large para llel and distributed applications . in 
this project tu/e participates with the group of professor farhad  arbab from  cw i. the project 
started in 2006 and the duration is 4 years.  
 
useful link(s)    www.workflowpatterns.com  
www.proces smining.org 
www.y awl-syste m.com 
www.win.tue .nl/ais 
www.globus.org www.nwo.nl/nwohom e.nsf/pages/nwoa_6r7fyj 
 
 
please contact : 
carm en bra tosin 
eindhoven university of technology, the netherlands 
tel.: +31 40  247 5144 
e-mail: c.t.bratosin@tue.nl  
 
 