on scientific workflow 
dr. jinjun chen 
swinburne university of technology, australia e-mail: jchen@ict.swin.edu.au 
web: http://www.ict.swin.edu.au/personal/jchen 
prof. dr. ir. w.m.p. van der aalst 
eindhoven university of technology, the netherlands 
e-mail: w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tm.tue.nl 
web: http://is.tm.tue.nl/staff/wvdaalst/ 
scientific workflow is another type of workflow that usually underlies in many 
complex e-science applications such as climate modeling and disaster recovery simulation. from the perspective of such e-science applications , based on dieter 
cybok’s paper in ggf10 there are at least three motivations for scientific workflow: 1) some complex e-science applic ations often require the creation of a 
collaborative workflow; 2) many e-scie ntists lack the necessary low-level 
expertise to utilize the current generation  of underlying computing infrastructure 
such as grid toolkits; 3) workflow spec ifications can be reused, modified and 
shared once they are defined. with these motivations, specific requirements for developing a scientific workflow management system need to be identified. the 
requirements may cover several aspects such as data or computation intensity 
and lifecycle management of participating services. the investigation of such 
requirements may be carried out from the following two points of view. 
1) those requirements for scientific wo rkflow are also ty pical in business 
workflow. scientific workflow is just another type of workflow. by nature, it 
should have some features in common with business workflow. business workflow 
has been under investigation for more than two decades. there are many 
techniques which have been developed and many scholars are working in the 
area. by identifying those common requirements such as control flow modelling, 
even-driven analysis and large-scale collaboration, we can try to adapt 
corresponding techniques from business wo rkflow to scientific workflow rather 
than develop them again. some of th ose requirements such as interactive steering may not be well supported by business workflow for the time being. 
however, since they are also needed by  business workflow, business workflow 
scholars may probably be working or will work on them because business 
workflow has been an area for a long ti me. in such situation, we may go along 
scientific workflow domain in parallel wi th business workflow domain. but more 
importantly, we should notice the recent  advances in business workflow domain 
to see whether new techniques have been developed which can be adapted to scientific workflow. 
2) those requirements for scientific workflow cannot be seen or are not typical in 
business workflow. this point should be mo re important as it makes the necessity 
of the name of “scientific workflow”. if all requirements for scientific workflow are 
also typical in business workflow, then even if some of them cannot be well 
supported by business workflow techniques for the time being, there may not be 
too much further research for us to do  as we can simply apply existing or 
upcoming techniques of business workflow  to scientific workflow. therefore, we 
need to identify scientific workflow spec ific requirements such as computation or 
data intensity and dynamic resource allocation, scheduling and mapping to 
underlying distributed infrastructure such as grid computing environments. for 
example, a scientific workflow normally  contains a large number of data or 
computation intensive activities. accordin gly, a scientific workflow management 
system needs to accommodate a large am ount of computation and transfer a 
huge amount of data between participants (grid services if supported by a grid 
environment). decentralised da ta transfer might be a good  way such as in a peer-
to-peer fashion, i.e., directly between participants rather than via the scientific 
workflow engine. corresponding techniques  for modelling interfaces of supporting 
services will also be needed. 
many efforts have been made on scienti fic workflow from scientific domain. for 
example, ggf10 and its special issue in concurrency and computation: practice and experience were early efforts. in ad dition, a special issue in international 
journal of high performance computing ap plications was anothe r effort. a special 
group in ggf (now ogf) was set up and is  an ongoing effort. scientific workflow 
is also a focus of ieee tcsc technical ar ea on workflow mana gement in scalable computing environments which is established recently 
(http://www.ict.swin.edu.au/personal/jc hen/tcsc/wmsce.htm). some relevant 
conferences and workshops have been held or are being run. for example, wage2007 (2nd international workshop on workflow management and applications in grid environments -http://www.ict.swin.edu.au/personal/jch en/wage/wage07.htm) will be running 
during august 16-18, 2007, in urumchi, xinjiang, china. another workshop called gpww2007 (3rd international workshop  on grid and peer-to-peer based 
workflows - http://www.ict.swin.edu.au/con ferences/gpww/2007/) will be held on 
sept. 24, 2007 in brisbane, australia. this  workshop is in conjunction with the 
5th international conference on busi ness process management (bpm 2007). 
there are also some other workshops su ch as wses07, swf2007 and works07, 
and some related projects such as swin dew-g, gridbus workflow and pegasus. 
swindew-g is a decentralised grid  workflow management system 
(http://www.ict.swin.edu.au /personal/jchen/swindew-
g/system_architecture.pdf) in which th e workflow execution and information 
interaction between participants are performed in a p2p fashion. swindew-g is being ported into a grid infrastructure called swingrid. the web links of some 
related conferences, workshops and projec ts can be found at the technical area 
website. 
with the efforts from scientific domain, gradually business workflow domain is 
also paying more and more attention to scientific/grid workflow. for example, the 
group of prof. w.m.p. van der aalst in eindhoven university of technology (tu/e) 
in the netherlands has achieved a lot of experience in process modelling, analysis 
and enactment. the workflow patterns  (www.workflowpatterns.com) have 
become a standard way to evaluate la nguages and the workflow management 
system. yawl is one of the most expressive and mature open-source workflow 
systems available today (w ww.yawl-system.com). moreover, they have been 
specialising in process anal ysis. using petri nets as a theoretical foundation, they 
have been able to analyse a variety of re al-life process models ranging from bpel 
and workflow specifications to the entire sap reference model. moreover, in recent years, they have focused on the analysis of processes based on system logs. the prom framework developed at tu/e provides a versatile toolset for process mining (www.processmining.org), wh ich seems to be particularly useful 
in a grid environment. in overall terms, they are trying to bring such knowledge 
together with grid computing in order to make further progress in both areas. specifically, they are trying to apply their ample knowledge to modelling grid applications, analysing grid workflow models and grid system logs, and building a process-aware grid infrastructure. they  use a mixture of petri nets and uml 
modelling to build formal/conceptual models  for grid computing. also, using petri-
net-based techniques, they analyse different mechanisms used in grid workflows in order to transfer correctness notions such as soundness to grid workflows. 
since in a grid environment many events are logged and the performance of the 
system is of the utmost importance, they are interested in applying their process 
mining techniques to the domain. by linking a fundamental enabling technology 
for the grids (globus) to a powerful proc ess engine (yawl) and state-of-the-art 
analysis tools (prom), they obtain an in teresting environment for experimentation 
towards building a process-aw are grid infrastructure. 
combining efforts from both scientific domain and business workflow domain 
might be able to provide a balanced way to exploring scientific workflow. this is 
one of the motivations for the ieee tcsc technical area on workflow 
management in scalable computing environments 
(http://www.ict.swin.edu.au/personal/ jchen/tcsc/wmsce.htm). since the 
technical area is located in ieee tcsc, it is automatically associated with scientific 
domain. to grab more attention and effo rts from business workflow domain, its 
steering committee consists of several world-class scholars from the business 
workflow/process area. 
 