this article was downloaded by: [kuwait university]
[kuwait university]
on:26 june 2007
access details: [subscription number 779290507]
publisher: taylor & francis
informa ltd registered in england and wales registered number: 1072954
registered office: mortimer house, 37-41 mortimer street, london w1t 3jh, uk
international journal of computer
integrated manufacturingpublication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t713804665
combining workflow and pdm based on the workflow
management coalition and step standards: the case of
axalant
first published on: 24 january 2007
to cite this article: rouibah, k., rouibah, s. and van der aalst, w. m. p. ,
'combining workflow and pdm based on the workflow management coalition and
step standards: the case of axalant ', international journal of computer integrated
manufacturing, 1 - 17
to link to this article: doi: 10.1080/09511920600930038
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09511920600930038
please scroll down for article
full terms and conditions of use: http://www.informaworld.com/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf
this article maybe used forresearch, teaching andprivate study purposes. anysubstantial orsystematic reproduction,
re-distribution, re-selling, loan orsub-licensing, systematic supply ordistribution inanyform toanyone isexpressly
forbidden.
the publisher does notgive anywarranty express orimplied ormake anyrepresentation that thecontents willbe
complete oraccurate oruptodate. the accuracy ofany instructions, formulae and drug doses should be
independently verified withprimary sources. thepublisher shall notbeliable foranyloss, actions, claims, proceedings,
demand orcosts ordamages whatsoever orhowsoever caused arising directly orindirectly inconnection with or
arising out of the use of this material.
© taylor and francis 2007downloaded by: [kuwait university] at: 12:35 26 june 2007 combining workﬂow and pdm based on the workﬂow management
coalition and step standards: the case of axalant
k. rouibah {, s. rouibah* {and w. m. p. van der aalst {
{department of quantitative methods and information systems, kuwait university,
p.o. box 5486 safat, code no 13055, kuwait
{department of technology management, eindhoven university of technology,
p.o. box 513, nl-5600 mb eindhoven, the netherlands
product data management (pdm) current technology has several pitfalls such as lack of
compliance of workﬂow modules to standards as well as lack of interoperability betweenthese systems. this paper illustrates the extension of the current workﬂow managementsystem part of the pdm system axalant to support engineering processes management.
the extension was based on an analysis of the workﬂow management coalition and stepstandards and, through the extension described in the paper, now axalant complies with
these standards. because of this it is now possible to exchange workﬂow data with
existing workﬂow systems on the market. in this paper the two standards are analysed,
the required workﬂow architecture is speciﬁed, and the resulting implementation isdescribed. the necessary enhancements include the extension of the data model ofaxalant , the modiﬁcation of the corresponding software, the modiﬁcation of the user
interface and the link to the interface between axalant and proview, which helps to
generate graphical process deﬁnitions. major achievements consist of the enhancement ofprocess design through the creation of building blocks (split- and join-operations) as wellas the enhancement of organizational structure through the usage of roles as a resource
for process activities. moreover, the paper adds ﬂexibility for axalant to handle changes,
and axalant is able to generate workﬂow templates and ad-hoc processes and to
communicate with external workﬂow systems.
keywords : product data management; workﬂow management system; process modeling;
axalant
tm; proview; web service; process mining
1. introduction
companies around the world are increasingly implement-
ing product data management (pdm) to improve their
competitiveness. the software market is increasing and has
experienced a growth of 62% and reached $2.86 billion in2000, and the forecast will exceed $13 billions in 2006.according to cimdata (2006), pdm systems supportmanagement of both engineering data and the productdevelopment process during the product lifecycle. thesesystems allow seamless interoperability between diﬀerent
departments and throughout the supply chain duringproduct design. participation/collaboration is especiallyeased by the use of the latest web-based systems (chu and
fan 1999, liu and xu 2001). pdm systems are particularly
important for companies in the engineering area, con-cerned with responding quickly, integrating large volumesof engineering data, and being ﬂexible (harris 1996). theterm ‘engineering data’ includes geometry, engineeringdrawings, project plans, part ﬁles, assembly diagrams,
*corresponding author. email: krouibah@cba.edu.kw
(part of this work was done at the i&t department at the faculty of technology management, and was fully supported by the ec project ep26780
simnet.)international journal of computer integrated manufacturing , 2007, 1 – 17, i-first article
international journal of computer integrated manufacturing
issn 0951-192x print/issn 1362-3052 online ª2007 taylor & francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
doi: 10.1080/09511920600930038downloaded by: [kuwait university] at: 12:35 26 june 2007 product speciﬁcations, bills of material, engineering
change orders, etc. pdm systems have several beneﬁtswhich have been well documented previously (philpotts1996, cimdata 1998, edm 1999, 2000 anonymous 2001,
smith 2004), including interdisciplinary collaboration,
reducing product development cycle time and data com-plexity, as well as improving project management.
1.1. focus of this paper
while pdm systems have several functions, workﬂow and
interoperability functions are the central focus in this
paper. the authors have focused on these two issues
because a survey performed in the united kingdom inmore than 100 middle-sized and large leading companies inmanufacturing and engineering (edm 2000) has shownthat important reasons for implementing pdm systemswere access to engineering data (85% of respondents) aswell as workﬂow and conﬁguration management (70% ofrespondents). the workﬂow management coalition
(wfmc 2006) deﬁnes the term ‘workﬂow system’ as a
system that helps an organization to ‘ deﬁne, create and
manage the execution of workﬂows through the use ofsoftware, running on one or more workﬂow engines (in our
case it is part of the pdm system), which is able to interpret
the process deﬁnition, interact with workﬂow participantsand, where required, invoke the use of other tools andapplications (other components/function of a pdm)’.
communication and notiﬁcation functions are facilitated
by an integrated mail systems.
over the last decade, literature has addressed several
pdm issues including case studies about their beneﬁts(schmitz 1999, anonymous 2001, smith 2004), methods todesign web-based systems (chu and fan 1999), applicationin speciﬁc industries (hemeri and nihtila 1998), implemen-tation issues (siddiqui et al. 2004, smith 2004), description
of speciﬁc systems (mansﬁeld 2002, eynard et al. 2004),
guidelines for implementations (siddiqui et al. 2004),
security requirements for distributed systems (leong et al.
2003), identiﬁcation of pdm requirements for collabora-tive product development (kumar and midha 2004),identiﬁcation of risks and the key success factors (littleret al. 1995), literature review and summary of research
questions (harris 1996), integration of pdm systems
with other systems such as enterprise resources planning
(erp) systems (gao et al. 2003), and state of the art
product lifecycle management (plm) functionalities(abramovici and sieg 2002). however, workﬂow enhance-ment within pdm systems and their interoperability havereceived little attention. an important question emerges:how to combine workﬂow and pdm in order to easecollaborative engineering processes? the aim of the current
paper is to enhance the workﬂow module of the axalant
developed by eigner & partners according to existingstandards.
1enhancements are done to increase the current
technology of pdm systems. this paper describes the trend,the open pdm-workﬂow architecture and the improve-ments done in terms of workﬂow interoperability, workﬂow
module design and its ease of use. speciﬁcally, this paper
brings two main contributions. first, it enables axalant to
comply with the standards of the workﬂow managementcoalition and step (standard for the exchange of product)model data (iso 2006) since few papers described suchcompliance. second, it adds interoperability functions toworkﬂow of axalant in order to facilitate exchanging
workﬂow data with workﬂow modules of other pdm.
enhancement eﬀorts were initiated within the european
communities project ep26780 simnet. section 2 is anoverview of current functions and limits of existingcommercial systems. section 3 describes the case ofenhancing axalant . it presents the analysis phase including
user’s requirements for an enhanced workﬂow module, thedesign phase that speciﬁes the desired pdm workﬂowmodule taking into account the analysis phase, and the
adaptation of the axalant workﬂow architecture. finally
section 4 summarizes the main ideas of the paper andpoints to future research directions.
2. evolution of pdm systems and assessment
of their functions
the world of pdm continues to evolve, and new acronyms,
deﬁnitions and viewpoints continue to emerge. they range
from extensions of computer added design (cad) systemsinto an independent system to plm (christmas 2001).according to cimdata, plm is a strategic businessapproach that applies a consistent set of business solutionsin support of the collaborative creation, management,dissemination and use of product deﬁnition informationacross the extended enterprise from concept to end of life.
plm oﬀers high and more sophisticated functions (kumar
and midha 2004).
1. interoperability functions enable users to connect
heterogeneous systems hosted by diﬀerent partners(e.g. other pdm, or erp systems or crm systems)and ease data exchange between them (kempfer 2000,gao et al. 2003, puschmann and alt 2004).
2. inter-organizational business process management,
communication and web integration functions linkdistributed teams over the supply chain (liu and xu2001, kumar and midha 2004).
3. security functions ensure conﬁdentiality of data
exchange and all users are under controlled andmanaged corporation (leong et al. 2003).
1eiger was acquired by its competitor, agile (agile 2006) leaving the
partner alone.2 k. rouibah et al.downloaded by: [kuwait university] at: 12:35 26 june 2007 despite their numerous beneﬁts, the potential of pdm
systems is not yet achieved by current systems (abramoviciand sieg 2002). beside the fact that no single systemavailable in the market provides all the previous pdm
capabilities (kumar and midha 2004), there are several
drawbacks of the current technology.
first, there is a lack of interoperability standards
between pdm systems leading to limited interoperabilityfunctions. a dutch study (wognum and drongelen 2001)has shown that 50% of sampled companies do exchangedata using pdm systems with their customers andsuppliers, and the exchange is limited. another study was
performed in cooperation with ibm and cimdata (edm
1999) and included 100 managers with more than 15 yearsof experience with pdm systems in 33 medium-sized tolarge companies. the study showed a weak level of systemintegration. only 15% of the adopters have achieved thehighest level of system use and integration. since colla-borative engineering data and workﬂow data are distrib-uted among partners, system integration and workﬂow
systems interoperability are two critical issues for product
lifecycle management. several authors have raised similarissues. for example the study by yeh and you (2002) wasconcerned with how to ensure system integration and howproduct data exchange is shared between heterogeneoussystems. the authors proposed an integrated data modelthat is step based. gao et al. (2003) presented another
drawback. there is a lack of a generic standard for pdm
system implementation. the authors proposed a model
integration that is step based. puschmann and alt (2004)observed (outside the scope of pdm ﬁeld) that eﬃcientcoordination and control of cross-organizational businessprocess can be achieved only with integrated informationsystems that deliver timely exact and right information.they also stressed that the integration should not be atdata-level but also at process level (workﬂow based). since
pdm systems have been developed according to diﬀerent
paradigms, their interoperability may be achieved through:(a) use of proprietary applications, which requires major,complex and costly customization (gao et al. 2003, currie
et al. 2004), (b) use of step standards (yeh and you 2002,
gao et al. 2003); and (c) use of uml (oh et al. 2001,
eynard et al. 2004). opposite to pdm, workﬂow systems
interoperability may be achieved through other standards
such as workﬂow management coalition. system integra-
tion is also an important issue in the area of enterpriseapplication integration systems (puschmann and alt2004). according to these authors, organizations spend atleast 40% of their it budget for integration purposes.sheth et al. (1999) reported fortune 2000 companies spend
25% to 33% of their it budget on system integration.
second, several workﬂow of pdm systems are very
restrictive and inﬂexible as observed by gao et al. (2003). in
the engineering areas, processes are complex, dynamic,subject to several changes, which require ﬂexibility and
adaptability. workﬂow modules within pdm systems showalso limited functions for collaborations processes thatspan company borders (rouibah and caskey 2003b) as well
as dynamic data sharing (noel and brissaud 2003) such as
the engineering change management process. this processencompasses emergence of a need for a change, request fora change, management approval of the change, implemen-tation, and documentation where all impacted product datahave been updated (rouibah and caskey 2003a). flex-ibility could be added to pdm by complying workﬂow toexisting standards. moreover, the authors have surveyed
papers related to workﬂow and pdm over the last 15 years
in the proquest data base. this showed a scarcity ofexisting studies, except the study done by kim et al. (2001).
the author developed a dynamic and ﬂexible workﬂowmodel that is step based. the main emphasis is placed ondynamic process adaptation (workﬂow-based) which is arequirement by product development. choi et al. (2002)
discussed and present a workﬂow model that satisﬁes
requirements of engineering/manufacturing processes.
anonymous (2001) reported that daimlerchrysler hasused fastcar, a web based system for collaborativeworkﬂow and change management that enables it to reducethe engineering change from twelve weeks to a few hours.the company processes tens of thousands of engineeringchanges annually. however, the authors did not specifywhether the system allows daimlerchrysler’s partners to be
involved or not.
third, other limits of current pdm technology have been
mentioned by other researches such as limited securityfunctions within distributed pdm systems (leong et al.
2003) as well as inter-organizational and concurrent work-ﬂow (rouibah and caskey 2003a).
the next section describes how some of the drawbacks
mentioned above were addressed through the combination
of workﬂow and pdm in axalant .
3. the case of improving axalant
3.1. necessity to combine workﬂow and pdm
combining workﬂow and pdm is relevant and noteworthy
for both academicians and practitioners.
for academicians it is an emerging research area since
few papers focused on this issue (see section 1.1). it is alsouseful to allow integration of processes handled in diﬀerentsystems such as customer relationship management, supplychain management, and enterprise resource planning.figure 1 shows the four areas where workﬂow and pdmmay interact with each other. in particular it is expectedthat the merge will help to better achieve cross-company
workﬂow coordination, ease inter-company engineering
change management, facilitate system integration and easecombining workﬂow and pdm 3downloaded by: [kuwait university] at: 12:35 26 june 2007 conﬁguration management. cross-company collaboration
between manufacturers and their suppliers is becoming areality in many business ﬁelds. manufacturers focusedon their core business and outsourced most of their noncore activities. this is shown in ﬁgure 1 by the mainmanufacturer who collaborates with three companies(a supplier b, an engineering partner a and a sub-
contractor c). each has its own data and speciﬁc systems,
but do share other data with other partners. accordingly,roles, activities, sequence of activities their planning as wellas authorities and responsibilities assigned to each rolemust be speciﬁed before carrying out any collaborativeproject. these processes may be supported either by a standalone workﬂow system, or by workﬂow modules embeddedin diﬀerent pdm systems. during design, many engineer-
ing changes including engineering change requests and
orders with speciﬁc deadlines take place due to the iterativenature of product design, and therefore many versions ofthe same product need to be maintained for the same designor for reuse in the future. these versions belong to a speciﬁcproject, and required speciﬁc product items (bill ofmaterial (bom)) with speciﬁc logical associations. theprocess of engineering change requests and orders must be
undertaken with careful control in order to minimize their
number. product items subject to change are stored ina diﬀerent component of pdm systems such as document
management, bill of material/item classiﬁcation, parametermanagement, as well as within workﬂow modules. versionsof product items are managed by the conﬁguration manage-ment module of the pdm system. when partners in acollaborative project work together, they may use diﬀerentsystems such as pdm, computer aided x (design, manufac-
turing, etc.), accordingly, integration requires identiﬁcation
of the process name, version of the system used, the name ofactivities supported by the system. thus the combination ofpdm and workﬂow is expected to ease the above process.
eﬀorts to merge workﬂow and pdm systems are also
important for practitioners and system developers. ‘ there
is high competition in the pdm market. integration ofour workﬂow module with other pdm systems is important
in order to ensure its competitiveness ’ quoted a product
manager of a leading pdm company. the marketopportunity is growing rapidly. according to arcweb(2006) plm is one of the most dynamic and fastest growingenterprise software markets. according to cimdata (2006)the product lifecycle management market is estimatedto exceed $20 billion by 2008 while it was $2.0 billion in2000. with the increase of the market opportunities,
companies are oﬀering better solutions to cope with
customers’ requirements, customer satisfaction and short
figure 1. some contexts where pdm and workﬂow sit together during collaborative design.4 k. rouibah et al.downloaded by: [kuwait university] at: 12:35 26 june 2007 responsiveness. this concept was introduced by blackburn
(1992) in order to qualify proactive and vigilant companieswho respond with appropriate actions to surpasscompetitors.
from the viewpoint of practitioners (i.e. the business
users’ view), the integration of workﬂow and pdm is aprerequisite to support inter-company collaboration alongthe product life cycle. the main reasons for collaboration onproduct development projects include satisfying customerrequirements, taking advantage of market opportunities forwhich the ﬁrm lacks necessary skills and technical expertise,and responding to changes in technology. integration of
workﬂow and pdm is expected to ease the automation of
engineering business process and to cut-down costs asso-ciated through early exchange of bids (preliminary engineer-ing data) between suppliers and original equipmentmanufacturers (oem) at the very early stages of newproduct development. furthermore, a case study performedwithin two european companies (rouibah and caskey2005) has shown that the beneﬁt of combining workﬂow and
pdm enables companies to move from project-based to
product-based in order to ease engineering change manage-ment. in the product design and engineering domain,workﬂow processes are not totally speciﬁed and requirenegotiation which lead to many ad-hoc engineering changes.
many studies have shown that the costs associated with theseengineering changes are very high. for example, boznak(1993) reported the annual engineering change processing
cost ranged from $3.4 million to $ 7.7 million, maull et al.
(1992) found that engineering change may incur a cost of upto 10% of annual turnover and watts (1984) found that itrequires an average of 40 days to discover an engineeringchange, 40 days to process and approve it, and 40 days toimplement it. in the same stream, clark and fujimoto (1991)found 20% to 40% of die development costs in vehicledevelopment are caused by engineering change. engineering
change management is a process of three phases. the ﬁrst
phase initiation of an engineering change request (ecr)consists of identifying a change to be carried out. forexample, modify the speed of a railway train. the secondphase consists of studying the engineering change request inorder to identify which product items (document, bill ofmaterial, parameter, etc.) are aﬀected by change, who needsto be informed and what critical data are needed to be
exchanged between aﬀected people. once all aﬀected people
agree on the request, the engineering change request is thentransformed into an engineering change order (eco). in thethird phase engineering change order is executed and allchanges are communicated to aﬀected people in order topropagate the changes on the objects/items under theircontrol. in this paper, it is argued that the link betweenworkﬂow and pdm could help to improve and achieve
earlier engineering change management, as well as to reduce
cost associated with this process.combining workﬂow with pdm may enable to over-
come two additional issues: heterogeneity and distribution.heterogeneity, herein discussed in terms of diﬀerent types
of data, pertains to information use in diﬀerent depart-
ments and partners. distribution pertains to ways to deliver
the right data to the right person in cases where there ischange.
the next section describes the analysis phase including
user’s requirements for an enhanced workﬂow module.
3.2. analysis and requirements collection
many perspectives characterize a workﬂow system design
(aalst et al. 2003). the desired workﬂow should support
ﬁve perspectives: process, organization, information,operation and integration. in the process perspective,workﬂow-process deﬁnitions are deﬁned to specify whichtasks need to be executed and in what order. many
languages have been proposed for designing workﬂowprocess deﬁnitions. typical languages are graphical and use
the building blocks such as or-split, or-join, and-split
and and-join to model sequential, parallel, conditional,and iterative routing. these have been included as aprerequisite in the reference model of the stand workﬂowmanagement coalition. in the organization perspective, theorganizational structure, theresources are speciﬁed as well
as the notiﬁcation service that informs workﬂow partici-pants about pending activities. the organizational structure
describes relations between roles (e.g. mechanical staﬀ) and
groups (e.g. sales department). resources are allocated to
roles and groups. the information perspective deals withcontrol andproduction data. control data are introduced
for the workﬂow engine purposes. production data areinformation objects (e.g. documents) whose existence doesnot depend on workﬂow management. the operationperspective describes the elementary operations performed
by resources and applications. typically, these operations
are used in the process perspective to create, read, ormodify control and production data. the integrationperspective is the link between the above four perspectives.recent research in the workﬂow domain addresses char-acteristics typically neglected by contemporary workﬂowsystems. among the desired functions, ﬂexibility (e.g. seeaalst and basten 2002) is of the utmost importance.
a ﬂexible workﬂow is a system that can be easily adapted
to change. it allows users to perform ad-hoc activities; to
alter ﬂows as appropriate; and to do unplanned exceptionhandling. according to aalst and basten (2002), changesmight range from ad-hoc modiﬁcations of a process to its
complete restructuring. the concern of this paper is toimprove the ad-hoc change.
with regards to the above functions, the next section
describes the weakness of axalant , and argues why
improvements are needed.combining workﬂow and pdm 5downloaded by: [kuwait university] at: 12:35 26 june 2007 3.2.1. the current workﬂow module of axalant and its
limitations. besides lack of interoperability with existing
workﬂow technology, analysis of the workﬂow moduleshows two major disadvantages:
1.axalant exhibits limitations with respect to work-
ﬂow design and does not comply with workﬂowmanagement coalition. with regard to processperspective, axalant exhibits several drawbacks.
a. first, the user interface of the workﬂow module
is part of the pdm system and cannot beseparated. the pdm system does feature a
workﬂow engine that executes workﬂows, but
its capabilities are limited.
b. second, the workﬂow system is not user friendly
enough (limited ease of use and accessibility anddoes not have a facility to generate graphicalworkﬂow process deﬁnitions). besides, it is ableonly to process workﬂows with linear sequencesof activities. it features only one type of activity,
the standard ‘activity’. in modern complex
business, most processes are not linear. com-pliance with workﬂow management coalitionrequires adding the logic of control ﬂow such asin a situation involving synchronization orchoice (or/and split). aalst et al. (2003)
presented a detailed discussion of the designpatterns workﬂow system should support.
c. third, workﬂow deﬁnitions are stored as a
sequence of activities with associated organiza-tional units. the role concept speciﬁed byworkﬂow management coalition is missing.organizational units can be expressed either by‘users’, ‘groups of users’ or ‘distribution list’,which exhibit disadvantages. without an orga-nization role model, for each activity it would be
necessary to enumerate all privileged users
individually. if a new user is added to theworkﬂow application, it is necessary to analyseevery single workﬂow activity, if the new usershall be privileged to execute this activity. theadministration eﬀort is enormous.
d. fourth, linked to previous, role speciﬁc work
items are missing. only two types of work items
are available: the ‘user speciﬁc work items’ and
the ‘group speciﬁc work items’ are successivelyexecuted. with regard to resource perspective,the workﬂow module of axalant exhibits only an
internal notiﬁcation service and does not sup-port intra company communication.
2.axalant exhibits limitations with respect to ﬂexibil-
ity. the term ﬂexible workﬂow has been used in the
literature mainly to denote workﬂow systems that
allow for a change in the process during its execution(aalst and basten 2002). with regard to this aspect,
the workﬂow module exhibits three limits.
a.first, each process within axalant is designed
from scratch, and it is impossible to specify a
workﬂow process deﬁnition once and replicate it
across the company. one solution uses work-ﬂow templates (aalst and basten 2002). it is astandard design of common workﬂow processthat lets designers reﬂect local diﬀerences andreuse common parts.
b. second, linked to previous limit, the workﬂow
module does not allow users to change processes
once they are designed, and to deal with
unexpected situations. an example is when adeadline for a task expires or the personresponsible is away.
c. third, the workﬂow module does not allow
users to generate workﬂow processes on an ad-
hocbasis, i.e. workﬂow processes whose struc-
ture cannot be predicted in advance.
since this paper deals with workﬂow interoperability,
two categories of speciﬁcations are available (see workﬂowmanagement coalition): (a) speciﬁcations for workﬂowmodelling and workﬂow description (design time) and (b)speciﬁcations for runtime interoperability. interface 1 ofthe workﬂow management coalition falls into the ﬁrstcategory while interface 4 and step fall into the second
category. interface 4 deﬁnes the mechanisms that workﬂow
product vendors are required to implement for oneworkﬂow engine to make requests of another. since axalant
exhibits a workﬂow module that is embedded in the pdmsystem, the focus is on the standard extensible markuplanguage (xml) process deﬁnition language (xpdl) ofthe workﬂow management coalition for workﬂow descrip-tion, and step for runtime interoperability. the next
sections describe how the existing workﬂow system can be
extended, in order to meet these two standards.
3.2.2. analysis of the step standard: allowing engineering
change management. the reason for focusing attention on
step is as follows. the step community copes mainlywith objects that are handled in a pdm system. there aremore emerging software products dealing with it. some of
them are commercial and quite expensive others are under
public domain. the availability of these numerous softwareproducts is a reason for the decision to implement theinterface with the exchange of step physical ﬁle. thecurrent focus is especially on objects which are contained inthe so-called ‘pdm-schema’. it oﬀers vendors the ability toextend the functionality of pdm using for example theexpress schemas. step (iso 10303) is an international
standard to facilitate the storage and exchange engineering
data related to products. two important parts of the step6 k. rouibah et al.downloaded by: [kuwait university] at: 12:35 26 june 2007 receive particular analysis: the object-oriented modelling
language express (deﬁned as iso standard 130303 part21) and the deﬁnition of data exchange formats (stepphysical file format, deﬁned as iso standard 10303-21).
the most important elements of the step are the so-called
‘application protocols’ which deﬁne application speciﬁcobjects. for an open workﬂow architecture, step is onlyinteresting for the exchange of data, and thus for theinteroperability of diﬀerent pdm-systems. however stepdoes cover dynamic aspects such as processes. step ap214 was the base for engineering change request (ecr)/eco in axalant . ecr is an oﬃcial request to carry out a
speciﬁc modiﬁcation, and eco is a result of approving an
ecr. eco is usually required to perform any modiﬁcationof released products. ecr and eco have been used as anengineering change management template in the workﬂowofaxalant . but step does not cover the workﬂow aspect of
engineering change management that describes the execu-tion of the modiﬁcation such as: who has to examine what?who is using which tools to modify the product deﬁnition?
also step does not explain how an ecr is released.
indeed, in the current axalant , the workﬂow is part of the
pdm system, thus it does not require exchanging ecror eco data with other pdm systems. therefore, thisresearch focuses on how ecr and eco are enhanced andimplemented in the pdm axalant .
3.2.3. analysis of the workﬂow management coalition
standard. in the early and mid-nineties a lot of workﬂow
systems were developed (georgakopoulos et al. 1995). since
then the workﬂow management coalition consortium hasbeen active in developing standards and establishingstandard terminology (fischer 2003). eﬀorts undertaken bythis consortium are clearly dedicated to supporting thestandardization of workﬂow applications, and thereforeinteresting for the design of an open pdm workﬂow
architecture. the workﬂow reference model aims to design
a uniform language for process modeling and presentsthe functional description of the necessary key softwarecomponents in a workﬂow system that eases its interoper-ability. interface 1 enables speciﬁcation for workﬂowmodelling and workﬂow description. this interface wasdeveloped to support the exchange of processes deﬁnitiondata between diﬀerent workﬂow systems based on xpdl.
it focuses on interoperability issues rather than on a uni-
form design language. the interface for the exchange ofworkﬂow process deﬁnitions was speciﬁed in close relationto the corresponding interface 1. the top level entities of thereference model describe entities contained within a work-ﬂow process deﬁnition, their relationships and attributes. italso describes development of an interface for the exchangeof workﬂow process deﬁnitions and the basis for the
exchange of workﬂow data too. aalst (2003) and shapiro
(2002) presented a detailed review of xpdl.besides the analysis of step and workﬂow management
coalition standards, the tool proview has been selected forthe workﬂows deﬁnition and integration with axalant .
the consortium workﬂow management coalition classiﬁes
workﬂow systems into two categories: process deﬁnition
and process execution. process deﬁnition tools may besupplied as part of a workﬂow system or as a separatesoftware. they help to model organizational processesgraphically and other tools may help to see how improve-ments could be made. where an organization model isincorporated into such tools the process deﬁnition willinclude organization roles. since the focus of proview is
not to analyse business processes, this type of tool is
referred to as a workﬂow modelling tool rather than abusiness process modelling tool. the authors adoptedproview instead of the aris toolset (ids-scheer 2006)for three main reasons. first, proview is developed bypisa (pisa 2006), that is partly owned by the companythat develops axalant . second, analysis showed proview
is more suitable to model workﬂows and to represent
organizational model based on the role concept. third,
proview is capable of modeling business processes in agraphical way since it has capabilities to represent processmodel with objects such as roles, activities, and hierarchiesof roles sequences. for the seamless integration, axalant
and proview need to communicate. this is achievedthrough step and xpdl (see section 3.5.2).
3.3. design: speciﬁcation of the desired pdm workﬂow
architecture
according to ﬁgure 2, the most important enhanced and
new elements are related to workﬂow, integration ofproview and external e-mail, and workﬂow interoperabil-ity. the next section describes how the functionalities ofthe desired axalant workﬂow have been extended.
3.4. enhancing the workﬂow through the extension of the
data model
figure 3 gives an overview of the corresponding data model
of the enhanced workﬂow of axalant . it shows three new
classes: ‘process’ representing the process itself, ‘activity’that can be assigned to a role, and ‘role’ that performs
speciﬁc activities.
the most important entities in this data model are the
following.
1. entity ecr. this entity did exist in earlier versions
ofaxalant . important attributes of this entity are:
identiﬁcation of request, version of request, descrip-tion of request, purpose of request, release proce-
dure, current status, type of request, reference to
activities. process respectively activity can becombining workﬂow and pdm 7downloaded by: [kuwait university] at: 12:35 26 june 2007 attached to an ecr. a folder (entity packet) may
be attached to an ecr to hold all products (e.g.documents) that are aﬀected by the modiﬁcation.
documents (entity document) which describe
the purpose of the engineering change can also beassigned to the ecr).usually an engineering changeis issued in the scope of a speciﬁc project (entityproject). finally, an ecr can be transformedinto an eco.
2. entity eco. this entity did also exist in earlier
versions of axalant . among important attributes of
this entity are: identiﬁcation of order, request
analysis, adopted solution, release procedure, cur-rent status, type of order, reference to activities, anddate of completion. a workﬂow process (entitiesprocess and activity) can be attached to aneco. if a folder (entity packet) is attached toecr, it is also attached to eco. the same appliesfor documents (entity document) and the
project (entity project) which may have been
assigned to the ecr.3. entity ‘process’. this is a new introduced entity
used to manage administrative data of a workﬂowprocess (e.g. creation date and author) and runtime
information (initiation document to be used, execu-
tion priority, time-limit to be checked, and personsto be notiﬁed). compared with the meta-model ofthe workﬂow management coalition, processcorresponds to the entity ‘workﬂow processdeﬁnition’. a workﬂow process reference of a listof activities (entity activity). a distinctionbetween a workﬂow process deﬁnition (template)
and instances of such a workﬂow process deﬁnition
is required. since the attributes required to describethese two diﬀerent types are quite similar (only theruntime information such as completion datesare added for the instances of a workﬂow process),the entity process is used to represent both types.from a functional point of view, four possible statescan be distinguished (ﬁgure 4).
a. the process template refers to a process which is
used as a template.
figure 2. architecture of the new pdm system.8 k. rouibah et al.downloaded by: [kuwait university] at: 12:35 26 june 2007 b. the process deﬁnition phase refers to a process
instance that has been created, or copied from atemplate, but has not been started yet; if notemplate is used, the process is ad-hoc . process
templates and ad-hoc are created to deal with
workﬂow ﬂexibility.
c. the process execution refers to a process
instance that has been initiated, but, not allactivities have been completed.
d. the process completion refers to a complete
execution of a process.
among important attributes associated with ‘pro-cess’ are: process’ name, version of the process,
description of the process, classiﬁcation of the
process, release procedure, current status, processtemplate is valid from (is valid until), start date of
the process, initiator of the process, icon forgraphical presentation of the process, time-limit,priority of the process, phase, responsible forprocess, completion date of the process, unique
process-id, action performed before completion, and
after completion.
4. entity ‘activity’. this is a new introduced
entity used to manage the individual activities(process steps) and corresponds to the entity‘workﬂow process activity’ in the meta-model ofthe workﬂow management coalition. a processdeﬁnition consists of one or more activities, each
comprising a role. an activity represents work
which will be processed by a role. other optional
figure 3. entities and relations of the extended data model of axalant .
figure 4. workﬂow lifecycle.combining workﬂow and pdm 9downloaded by: [kuwait university] at: 12:35 26 june 2007 information may be associated with the activity
such as: started (ﬁnished) automatically by theworkﬂow system and priority relative to otheractivities. usage of speciﬁc workﬂow relevant data
items by the activity may also be speciﬁed (e.g.
pre- and post-condition, transition conditions orworkﬂow participant assignment). an activity mayhave three forms: an atomic activity, a sub-ﬂow(a complex activity) or speciﬁed as a loop.therefore, entity activity has many attributes.the most important are: sequence number ofactivity within list; hierarchy level; resources (e.g.
a user or a role); list of required preceding
activities; description of work item when activitybecomes active; action performed before comple-tion (or after completion); and type of activity(e.g. split, join). the sequence of the activities ismodeled by predecessors. each activity knows the
predecessor to watch out for in order to startexecution. this corresponds to the ‘transition
information’ in the meta-model of the workﬂow
management coalition. to comply with thisstandard, seven new activity types, representingbuilding blocks of the language (aalst et al. 2003),
have been deﬁned for axalant , which are ‘ normal
activity ’, ‘join-and ’, ‘split-and ’, ‘split-or ’, ‘join-
or’, ‘split-xor ’, and ‘ join-xor ’
5. entity ‘role’. this is similar to the entity
workﬂow participant in the meta-model of the
workﬂow management coalition. besides users,groups, distribution resources in axalant , roles
have also been added. a role refers to a singleor a group of participants exhibiting a speciﬁc setof qualiﬁcations and/or skills. moreover, besidesthe user work item and group work item the
enhanced axalant covers role work item too. it
refers to a work item that has to be executed by
any user with a speciﬁc role. for this purpose thework item list has a new attribute that shows thename of the role.
many features have been implemented to enhance
the pdm axalant . these are presented in the next section.
3.5. concrete realization
3.5.1. enhancements of the workﬂow process. with regard
to the workﬂow process, four diﬀerent forms for the entityprocess have been deﬁned, including process templates.a new process can be created as a template or as aprocess instance with the status in deﬁnition phase. thestatus in execution is set as soon as the workﬂow process is
initiated. if the last activity has been completed, the process
state will change to completed. the availability of theprocess template enables the generation of an ad-hoc
workﬂow and to integrate changes when needed. thetransition between the four diﬀerent states of a process isperformed automatically.
to simplify the deﬁnition of a complete workﬂow pro-
cess including the associated activities, a combined formallows easy access to both entities (process template andactivities). figure 5 shows an example of a process templatewith seven associated activities. this ﬁgure also shows theselection of the corresponding activity type with the help ofa ﬁeld select menu. activities can be deﬁned easier with thehelp of proview by simple drag.
to perform work item list, a notiﬁcation mechanism
about pending work items is used. this occurs in two ways:system internal notiﬁcation (that is improved) and systemexternal notiﬁcation (which has been developed). internalnotiﬁcation represents an existing notiﬁcation mechanisminaxalant but has been improved. axalant features group
in-boxes andindividual in-boxes . the in-box is similar to
that of an email system. the user in-box shows all
outstanding work items which the particular user has
received. the group out-box and user out-box shows all
work items which were sent already but have not yet beenprocessed by the recipient. work items (internal mail) inaxalant can be created and sent through a form which
includes information such as a target (user, group or roletoo), priorities, and a mail text. some ﬁelds are ﬁlledautomatically by the system.
external notiﬁcation is achieved through integration of
axalant with external email systems (e.g. microsoft out-
look). such integration is useful for the inter-companycollaboration. since axalant is capable of managing
addresses of companies and persons, the correspondingemail addresses can be started from several axalant
modules including workﬂow, document management,engineering change management and project management.
the integration of external emails with the workﬂow allows
automatic generation notiﬁcation about the status change
of objects. when sending documents, axalant works the
same way as a normal email system.
3.5.2. interface between proview and axalant .the inter-
face for the exchange of workﬂow deﬁnitions betweenaxalant and proview has been developed in two phases. in
the ﬁrst one, integration was achieved through the use of
express and step physical ﬁles. later on, in the secondphase, such an interface has been adapted to xpdl. in theﬁrst phase, an interface has been developed based on stepphysical ﬁles. for bi-directional data transmission theproper ﬁle format must be understood by the two systems.the nature of this interface is the ‘step physical file’format (standardized as an iso standard 10303-21) which
is used for the data exchange. the nature of the interface is
an interchange format and application program interface10 k. rouibah et al.downloaded by: [kuwait university] at: 12:35 26 june 2007 calls, which can support the exchange of process deﬁnition
information over a variety of physical or electronicinterchange media. the interface may support the exchangeof a complete process deﬁnition or a subset, for example aset of process deﬁnition changes or the attributes of aparticular activity within the process deﬁnition. the inter-face is termed the process deﬁnition import/export inter-
face. processors are developed that convert the axalant data
to the step-file format and vice versa these are launchedbyaxalant and run without interaction of the user. with
the help of this iso standard, the syntax and the contentsof exchange ﬁles are speciﬁed in a schema deﬁnition. forthe description of this schema the speciﬁcation languageexpress is used. figure 6 depicts the steps of importing aworkﬂow deﬁnition from proview to axalant . it describes
all relevant data to be exchanged such as version of axalant ,
proview version to which the processor belongs, name ofthe step physical ﬁle from which the workﬂow datashould be imported to axalant , and other data related to
workﬂow process (process name, activity names, predeces-sors, etc.).
since xpdl has become a standard for data commu-
nication between heterogeneous systems (see wfmc 2002),
the interface (intially step based) was adapted to xpdl.
it is used to notify users about new work-items as well as toexchange messaging between diﬀerent workﬂow engines
independent of the process deﬁnition language used.
3.6. scenario illustrating the approach
let us assume two companies (a and b) are involved in a
collaborative eﬀort to design a new mechanical product
(e.g. a rail way bogie). the two companies contribute to
design a product according to ﬁgure 1. each companyholds data related to product design which are stored intheir local pdm system (either the same with diﬀerentversions) as well as in diﬀerent cad systems. engineersneed to optimize the design by considering a number ofparameters (including geometrical, such as wheel diameter,brake power and total train weight). such design involves
decisions (activities) based on parameter speciﬁcations (see
rouibah and caskey 2005). some of them are known inadvance. for example, ‘initiate parameter value’, ‘approvevalue’, ‘release value’, and ‘modify value’, while others arenot known (e.g. who is aﬀected by a parameter change,what other item-components are aﬀected by the currentchange). several roles originating from diﬀerent depart-ments are involved in the product design/ and to perform
these activities. during the kick-oﬀ, members of the two
companies collectively deﬁne a new collaborative project
figure 5. interface of the enhanced workﬂow processes and associated activities.combining workﬂow and pdm 11downloaded by: [kuwait university] at: 12:35 26 june 2007 that is managed by their pdm respectively. the project
manager of the new project is nominated and the workbreakdown structure is deﬁned. this consists of splittingparts of the new product among the two partners. users
originating from diﬀerent disciplines may participate in the
product design. each user may play diﬀerent roles and takeon diﬀerent responsibilities. for example, a designer maybe primarily in charge of decisions regarding a particularparameter value, but also be consulted about otherparameter /component values that inﬂuence their decision.in rouibah and caskey (2003a), ﬁve roles were deﬁned:thecoordinator of a parameter is a person technically
responsible for it and drives its elaboration or evolution.
collaborators are directly involved in the parameter
elaboration, for example engineers from diﬀerent partnersworking on the same interface parameter, but having adiﬀerent view on it (e.g. people from mechanical andelectrical departments). reviewers includes all users that
must be consulted about a parameter, but do not determineit, such as a production planner who must check whether a
shaft with a certain length can be produced in-house or not.
subscribers can be persons wishing to be informed about
the development of a certain parameter without beingassigned to a category that works on it (e.g. a personfrom the marketing department). the supervisor is respon-
sible for releasing a parameter. users assuming the ﬁveroles and their privileges in charge of the parameterapproach are appointed to the project within each partner.
a design process starts when a supervisor instantiates a
project container. the parameters of the project areidentiﬁed in ‘un-worked’ status. all these parameters
must pass from un-worked toreleased status. such
upgrading is controlled by a workﬂow that involves sevenactivities. this process (see ﬁgure 7) could be easily
generated with the help of proview and executed by
axalant at both sides.
this workﬂow process shows the seven activities and
their sequence. if the size of the process is too large,proview does feature a navigator that helps users tovisualize a sub-set of the process as well as the wholeprocess. such processes could also be altered or evenextracted from a previous process if it exists previously.
moreover, the ﬁve roles appointed to initiate, approve,
release, and modify the parameters can be easily assigned tothis workﬂow. since bills of material, product items, projectitems in pdm and workﬂow are combined, then it ispossible to inform any role in case a modiﬁcation takesplace in any of these items. diﬀerent roles can be suppliedwith bids (preliminary information) . data are exchanged
between roles across company borders until a consensus is
reached. such mechanism is described in more detail in
(rouibah and caskey 2003b). the most important func-tions performed are the following.
1. the supervisor opens a session and requests colla-
borators to specify parameter values under theircontrol.
2. the collaborator selects a parameter, under his
control, with status ‘ un-worked ’ and assigns a para-
meter range value (minimum and maximum).
figure 6. architecture of the interface between proview and axalant .12 k. rouibah et al.downloaded by: [kuwait university] at: 12:35 26 june 2007 3. the pdm system actively being worked upon, sets
the parameter in status ‘ in-work ’, and generates
automatic messages to coordinators in the engineer-ing functions (both at companies a and b) and asksthem to contribute to ﬁx it (either to agree about itsvalue or to request change).
4. once all involved roles agree on a value, com-
munication between the two pdm takes placeaccording to the mechanism explained in this paper,
then the parameter is promoted in status to ‘ in
approval ’, and the pdm system generates messages
to ‘reviewers’ and ‘subscribers’ from other businessfunctions such as manufacturing and marketing whomay express interest in the parameter. product
manufacturability could be the reason for participa-
tion of people from manufacturing department.
figure 7. example of a scenario based on parameter approach.combining workﬂow and pdm 13downloaded by: [kuwait university] at: 12:35 26 june 2007 5. once an agreement is reached among all ﬁve roles
involved in the collaborative design, the pdmsystem compares diﬀerent value ranges, generatesthe common consensus range value, and sets the
parameter in status ‘ in release ’.
6. the supervisor checks whether all the objections
have been dealt with and taken into consideration,then he sets the parameter in status ‘released’. onceeach parameter reaches this status it cannot bealtered until a request of change is initiated.changing customer speciﬁcations is a reason toinitiate a request to alter a parameter value.
7. in case there is a request for a parameter change
after it has been frozen, the engineering changemanagement module of the pdm system is used. anengineering change request is initiated and thesupervisor requests collaborators and coordinatorsto study the request. in case it is accepted, therequest is transformed into an engineering order, theparameter is set in status ‘ in change ’ and the pdm
system sends an automatic message to all ﬁve roles
including those in b.
8. the same process is then re-iterated and the pdm
system maintains versions of parameters underconﬁguration management function. users aﬀectedby such a change are identiﬁed in an ad-hoc manner,
since they freely subscribed to these parameters, andthey need to study the potential impact of the change
on parameters under their control as well as possible
document (under document management function),and other product items (under bill of materialand classiﬁcation functions). each user will thencreate a list of aﬀected parameters. a collectiveworkﬂow process is then initiated for such aparameter, which is described elsewhere (rouibahand caskey 2003a).
4. conclusion and perspectives
this paper discussed the need to combine workﬂow and
pdm. the main idea advocated in the paper is to achieveinter-company workﬂow coordination, ease inter-companyengineering change management, facilitate system integra-tion and ease conﬁguration management. this is a
promising area of research in the engineering ﬁeld. the
merge between workﬂow and pdm was preceded bythe analysis of two well established standards: xpdl ofthe workﬂow management coalition and step. the ﬁrstone was used to increase workﬂow integration andﬂexibility while the second one was used to achievegeneric pdm design and to improve engineering changemanagement. the main contributions of this paper are
related to the workﬂow design and interoperability of
pdm systems according to these two standards. majorachievements fall in the application of existing workﬂow
concepts rather than workﬂow design innovations as wellas the improvement of other pdm components. in parti-cular, these are related to: (a) the new entity ‘process’,
used to manage administrative data of a workﬂow process
such as the engineering change management, (b) the addi-tional attributes for the existing entity ‘activity’, (c) thenew building block split- and join-operations, and(d) usage of roles as a resource for process activities.moreover, enhancements allow to model and executeworkﬂow templates as well as ad-hoc processes which
add ﬂexibility to the pdm system. the usage of step/
xpdl guarantees the open character of the developed
interface.
enhancements undertaken have several beneﬁts for
companies willing to adopt pdm systems.
1. engineering processes could be easily automated
with the enhanced workﬂow leading to more beneﬁtsfrom the system.
2. engineering change management is improved and
enables to track changes in a simple way allowingmore and early communications between diﬀerentdesigners involved in product development, andtherefore will contribute to reducing the cost ofengineering changes.
3. workﬂow module of pdm systems (e.g. axalant )i s
more ﬂexible which allows easy modiﬁcations to
combine tasks, modify and reuse processes, and
rearrange resources allocation to tasks, and thus giveusers more ﬂexibility to deal with ad-hoc changes
that may occur in their business.
4. the interface (step-based and later on xpdl-
based) for the exchange of workﬂow deﬁnitionsbetween axalant and proview allows the exchange of
predeﬁned structured workﬂows as well as ad-hoc
workﬂows.
xpdl was also used for the synchronization between
diﬀerent workﬂow engines located at diﬀerent partnersduring inter-company collaboration. designers can nowdeﬁne process templates graphically with higher capabilitiescompared to the sequential activities in the past, whichallows reducing the complexity of current workﬂow
processes. a notiﬁcation service was implemented, that
informs workﬂow participants about new work items whichenables to ease intra and inter-company communication aswell as engineering change management. this is useful foremployees in collaborative design who do not have anypdm and would not learn that new work items hadarrived. the enhanced pdm system can help to improveeﬃciency and quality of the work in companies with a lot of
engineering eﬀort and allows them to maintain close
collaboration with suppliers, customers and engineering14 k. rouibah et al.downloaded by: [kuwait university] at: 12:35 26 june 2007 partners. moreover, the merge of pdm and workﬂow is
rather innovative and of interest for a community witha background in product development and product life-cycle management where a lot of costs can be reduced.
information system managers can also beneﬁt from this
paper since it calls for more attention to manage engineer-ing changes in an intelligent manner in order to reduce thehigh cost associated with the frequent engineering changes.the approach presented here could be a starting point for adeep thinking on ways to reduce these costs.
however, the paper should only be seen as the step
towards combining pdm and workﬂow functionality in a
comprehensive manner. the solutions provided should be
considered in light of the four limitations.
1. the paper is very much focused on a speciﬁc
commercial solution.
2. the enhancement of axalant introduces several
missing functions in current pdm technology butit does not solve issues such as security and dynamic
sharing of design data.
3. the paper focuses on workﬂow design based on
the interface 1 (xpdl-based) of the workﬂowmanagement coalition and did not consider otherperspectives of the workﬂow reference model. eventhough xpdl has been promoted it has not beenadopted by all workﬂow vendors and still does notproduces satisfactory results but the number of
those who comply is increasing. for example, in
the assessment of existing standards, aalst (2003)observed that some of workﬂow systems vendors canexport to xpdl, but none of them can importxpdl from another system and still produce mean-
ingful results since there is no consensus about used
constructs.
4. during axalant improvement, strong focus was
mainly on two standards.
to overcome the above limitations, this paper proposes to
further investigate three research directions.
first, it suggests continuing to explore the improvement
of workﬂow and pdm in particular through exploration ofa possible switch to web service. this paper stresses theneed for pdm and workﬂow systems to comply with the
two standards (xpdl oriented workﬂow and step
oriented pdm). as indicated, xpdl is not satisfactory.as an alternative this paper encourages to investigate theweb service paradigm that triggered the development ofnew and relevant standards. the functionality of webservice composition languages (also referred to as ‘webservice orchestration’) like business process executionlanguage for web services (bpel4ws), web services
flow language (wsfl), and xlang, which is very
similar to traditional workﬂow languages. for example,bpel4ws is built on ibm’s wsfl and microsoft’s
xlang. xlang is a block-structured language withbasic control ﬂow structures such as sequence, switch (forconditional routing), while (for looping), all (for parallel
routing), and pick (for race conditions based on timing or
external triggers). in contrast to xlang, wsfl is notlimited to block structures and allows for directed graphs.wohed et al. (2003) provided more information about the
evaluation of bpel4ws, xlang, and wsfl using theworkﬂow patterns (aalst et al. 2003). these standards
allow workﬂow interoperability and eﬀorts are initiatedto converge these standards. it seems that bpel4ws will
become the de-fact standard in this domain. however, the
focus of bpel4ws is limited to control-ﬂow and does notincorporate things like documents, roles, and people.therefore, languages like bpel4ws can only provide partof the solution.
second, another research direction is related to the
improvement of security within plm system to supportengineering collaborative process. engineering collabora-
tion that span company borders has become a must
(rouibah and caskey 2005) accordingly dynamic datasharing (noel and brissaud 2003) and security withindistributed pdm system (leong et al. 2003) are two
challenges facing partners when collaboration takes placewithin a network. since collaboration may involve compe-titors and require dynamic data sharing, how to grant dataaccess and data modiﬁcation based on the engineering
change management process when the design involves
suppliers and customers while leaving the data under theircontrol?
third, experiences with the application of workﬂow
management concepts in pdm show that developmentprocesses are much more dynamic and chaotic thantraditional workﬂows encountered in banks, insurancecompanies, governments, etc. this puts high demands on
making workﬂow management systems more ﬂexible.
recently, improvements have been proposed and imple-mented to make workﬂow management systems moreﬂexible (rinderle et al. 2004). however, these improve-
ments have not been realized in many commercial systems(flower being one of the exceptions). moreover, thenature of pdm will always be that people want and needto deviate from standard processes. therefore, it is
interesting to follow these deviations through process
mining (aalst et al. 2004). the goal of process mining is to
extract models from audit trails of systems (e.g. pdmsystems). these may be process models but also organiza-tional models, social networks, decision models, etc.moreover, process mining can be used to measureconformance. process mining has shown its value inengineering-like processes with many deviations (kindler
et al. 2005) and is supported by mature tools such as
prom (dongen et al. 2005).combining workﬂow and pdm 15downloaded by: [kuwait university] at: 12:35 26 june 2007 references
aalst, w.m.p. van der, business process management demystiﬁed: a
tutorial on models, systems and standards for workﬂow management .
inlectures on concurrency and petri nets: advances in petri nets.
lecture notes in computer science , vol. 3089, pp. 1–65, 2003 (springer-
verlag: berlin).
aalst, w.m.p. van der and basten, t., inheritance of workﬂows: an
approach to tackling problems related to change. theor. comput. sci. ,
2002, 270, 125–203.
aalst, w.m.p. van der, ter hofstede, a.h.m., kiepuszewski, b. and
barros, a.p., workﬂow patterns. distrib. parallel dat , 2003, 14, 5–51.
aalst, w.m.p. van der, weijters, a.j.m.m. and maruster, l., workﬂow
mining: discovering process models from event logs. ieee trans.
knowledge data engng , 2004, 16, 1128–1142.
aalst, w.m.p. van der, basten, t., verbeek, h.m.w., verkoulen, p.a.c.
and voorhoevem, m., adaptive workﬂow: on the interplay between
ﬂexibility and support. in enterprise information systems , edited by
j. filipe, pp. 61–68, 2000 (kluwer academic publishers, norwell).
abramovici, m. and sieg, o.c., status and development trends of product
lifecycle management systems, 2002. available online at: http://www.
itm.rub.de/download/publikationen/status_and_development_trends_of_plm.pdf (accessed may 2006).
agile 2006. www.agile.com
anonymous, collaborative engineering through the supply chain. strategic
direction , 2001, 17, 30–33.
arcweb 2006. www.arcweb.com.
blackburn, j.d., time-based competition: white collar activities. business
horizon , 1992, 35, 96–102.
boznak, r.g, competitive product development , 1993 (business one irwin/
quality press, milwaukee, wi).
choi, i., park, c. and lee, c., a transactional workﬂow model for
engineering/ manufacturing processes. int. j. comput. integr. mfg , 2002,
15, 178–192.
christmas, a., cad/cam and plm. modern machine shop , 2001, 74,
110–112.
chu, x. and fan, y., product data management based on web technology.
integr. mfg systems , 1999, 10, 84–88.
cimdata, product data management: the deﬁnition, an introduction to
concepts, beneﬁts, and terminology , 1998 (cim-data). available online
at: www.cimdata.com.
cimdata 2006. www.cimdata.com
clark, k.b. and fujimoto, t., product development performance:
strategy, organization and management in the world auto industry ,
1991 (harvard business school press: cambridge, ma).
currie, w.l., wang, x. and weerakkody, v., developing web services
using the microsoft.net platform: technical and business challenges.
j. enterprise inf. mgmt , 2004, 17, 335–350.
dongen, b.f. van, de medeiros, a.k., verbeek, h.m.w., weijters,
a.j.m.m. and van der aalst, w.m.p., the prom framework: a new
era in process mining tool support. in proceedings of the 26th
international conference on applications and theory of petri nets(icatpn 2005), lecture notes in computer science , edited by
g. ciardo and p. darondeau, vol. 3536, pp. 444–454, 2005 (springer-
verlag: berlin).
edm, engineering data management newsletter, beneﬁts of edm/pdm.
mfg industries , 1999,
9, 1–6.
edm, engineering data management newsletter, uk. pdm survey ,
2000, 9, 6–10.
eynard, b., gallet, t., nowak, p. and roucoules, l., uml based
speciﬁcations of pdm product structure and workﬂow. comput. ind .,
2004, 55, 301–316.
fischer, l. (editor), workﬂow handbook workﬂow management coalition ,
2003 (future strategies: lighthouse point, florida).gao, j.x., aziz, h., maropoulos, p.g. and cheung, w.m., application of
product data management technologies for enterprise integration. int. j.
comput. integr. mfg , 2003, 16, 491–500.
georgakopoulos, d., hornick, m. and sheth, a., an overview of workﬂow
management: from process modeling to workﬂow automation infra-
structure. distrib. parallel dat ., 1995, 3, 119–153.
harris, s.b., business strategy and the role of the engineering product data
management: a literature review and summary of the emerging researchquestions. j. engng mf, proc. imeche, part b , 1996, 210, 217–219.
hemeri, a. and nihtila, j., product data management exploratory study on
the state-of-the-art in one-of-a-kind industry. comput. ind ., 1998, 35,
195–206.
ids-scheer 2006. www.ids-scheer.com
international organization for standardization, 2006, www.iso.chkempfer, l., pdm make the connection. comput.-aided engng , 2000, 19,
26–30.
kim, y., kang, s., lee, s. and yoo, s., a distributed open intelligent
product data management system. int. j. comput. integr. mfg , 2001, 14,
224–235.
kindler, e., rubin, v. and scha ¨fer, w., incremental workﬂow mining
based on document versioning information. in unifying the software
process spectrum: international software process workshop, spw 2005 ,
edited by m. li, b. boehm and l.j. osterweil, revised selected papers,pp. 387–301, 2005 (springer: new york).
kumar, r. and midha, p.s., a qfd methodology for evaluating a
company’s pdm requirements for collaborative product development.ind. mgmt data systems , 2004, 101, 126–132.
leong, k.k., yu, k.m. and lee, w.b., a security model for distributed
product data management system. comput. ind ., 2003, 50, 179–193.
littler, d., leverick, f. and bruce, m., factors aﬀecting the process of
collaborative product development: a study of uk manufacturers of
information and communications technology products. j. prod. innova-
tion mgmt , 1995, 12, 16–32.
liu, t. and xu, x.w., a review of web-based product data management
systems. comput. ind ., 2001, 44, 251–262.
mansﬁeld, t., an easy-to-implement pdm. machine des ., 2002, 74, 84–85.
maull, r., hughes, d. and bennett, j., the role of the bill of materials as a
cad/cam interface and the key importance of engineering change
control.
comput. control eng. j. , 1992, march, 63–70.
noel, f. and brissaud, d., dynamic data sharing in a collaborative design
environment. int. j. comput. integr. mfg , 2003, 16, 546–556.
oh, y., han, s. and suh, h., mapping product structure between cad
and pdm systems using uml. comput. aided des ., 2001, 33, 521–529.
philpotts, m., an introduction to the concepts, beneﬁts and terminology of
product data management. ind. mmgt data systems , 1996, 96, 11–17.
pisa 2006, www.pisa.de.
puschmann, t. and alt, r., enterprise application integration systems and
architecture – the case of the robert bosch group. j. enterprise inf.
mgmt , 2004, 17, 105–116.
rinderle, s., reichert, m. and dadam, p., correctness criteria for dynamic
changes in workﬂow systems: a survey. data and knowledge engineering.
special issue on advances in bus. proc. mgmt , 2004, 50, 9–34.
rouibah, k. and caskey, k., change management in concurrent engineering
from a parameter perspective. comput. ind ., 2003a, 50, 15–34.
rouibah, k. and caskey, k., an engineering workﬂow system for the
management of inter-company engineering processes. j. engng des .,
2003b, 14, 273–293.
rouibah, k. and caskey, k, managing concurrent engineering across
company borders: a case study. int. j. comput. integr. mfg , 2005, 18,
509–521.
schmitz, b., steelcase reduces new part generation with pdm. comput.-
aided engng , 1999, 18, 8–9.
shapiro, r. a comparison of xpdl, bpml and bpel4ws (version 1.4),
2002. http://xml.coverpages.org/shapiro-xpdl.pdf.16 k. rouibah et al.downloaded by: [kuwait university] at: 12:35 26 june 2007 sheth, a.p., aalst, w.a. and arpinar, i.b., 1999, processes deriving
the networked economy. ieee concurrency , july–september 1999,
pp. 2–15.
siddiqui, q.a., burns, n.d. and backhouse, c.j., implementing product
management the ﬁrst time. int. j. comput. integr. mfg , 2004, 17, 520–533.
smith, a., empirical exploration for a product data management system at
a major telecommunication ﬁrm. ind. mgmt data systems , 2004, 104,
513.
watts, f., engineering changes: a case study. prod. inventory mgmt j .,
1984, 25, 55–62.
workﬂow management coalition, workﬂow process deﬁnition interface-
xml process deﬁnition language , 2002, wfmc-tc-1025. available
online at: www.wfmc.org.wfmc 2006, www.wfmc.org.
wognum, p.m. and kerssens-van drongelen, i.c., process and
impact of product data management implementation . bremen, germany,
2001.
wohed, p., van der aalst, w.m.p., dumas, m. and ter hofstede, a.h.m.,
analysis of web services composition languages: the case of
bpel4ws. in 22nd international conference on conceptual modeling.
lecture notes in computer science , edited by i.y. song, s.w. liddle,
t.w. ling and p. scheuermann, vol. 2813, pp. 200–215, 2003 (springer
verlag; berlin).
yeh, s. and you, c., step-based data schema for implementing product
data management. int. j. comput. integr. mfg , 2002, 15, 1–17.combining workﬂow and pdm 17