an outlook on semantic business process
mining and monitoring
a.k. alves de medeiros1,c .p e d r i n a c i2, w.m.p. van der aalst1,
j. domingue2,m .s o n g1,a .r o z i n a t1,b .n o r t o n2, and l. cabral2
1eindhoven university of t echnol ogy, p.o. box 513,
5600mb, ei ndhoven, the netherlands
{a.k.medeiros,w.m.p.v.d.aalst,m.s.song,a.rozinat }@tue.nl
2knowledge media institute, the open university, milton keynes, uk
{c.pedrinaci,j.b.domingue,b.j.norton,l.s.cabral }@open.ac.uk
abstract. semantic business process management (sbpm) has been
proposed as an extension of bpm with semantic web and semantic
web services (sws) technologies in order to increase and enhance the
level of automation that can be achieved within the bpm life-cycle. in
a nutshell, sbpm is based on the extensive and exhaustive conceptual-
ization of the bpm domain so as to support reasoning during business
processes modelling, composition, execution, and analysis, leading to im-
portant enhancements throughout the life-cycle of business processes. an
important step of the bpm life-cycle is the analysis of the processes de-
ployed in companies. this analysis provides feedback about how these
processes are actually being executed (like common control-ﬂow paths,
performance measures, detection of bottlenecks, alert to approaching
deadlines, auditing, etc). the use of semantic information can lead to
dramatic enhancements in the state-of-the-art in analysis techniques. in
this paper we present an outlook on the opportunities and challenges on
semantic business process mining and monitoring, thus paving the way
for the implementation of the next generation of bpm analysis tools.
1 introduction
nowadays many companies use information systems to support the execution of
their business processes. examples of such information systems are erp, crm
or workﬂow management systems. these information systems usually generate
events while executing business processes [9] and these events can be recorded
in logs (cf. figure 1). the competitive world we live in requires companies to
adapt their processes in a faster pace. ther efore, continuous and insightful feed-
back on how business processes are actually being executed becomes essential.
additionally, laws like the sarbanes-oxley act force companies to show their
compliance to standards. in short, there is a need for good analysis tools that
can provide feedback information about how business process are actually being
executed based on the observed (or re gistered) behavior in event logs.
business process management (bpm) systems aim at supporting the whole
life-cycle (design, conﬁguration, execution and analysis) necessary to deploy and
r. meersman,z. tari, p.herreroetal. (eds.):otm 2007 ws, partii, lncs 4806, pp. 1244–1255, 2007.
c/circlecopyrtspringer-verlag berlin heidelberg 2007an outlook on semantic business process mining and monitoring 1245
information
system
models
analyzes
discoveryrecords
events,e.g.,
messages ,
transactions ,
etc.specifies
configures
implementsanalyzessupports /
controls
extensionconformance“world”
peoplemachines
organizationscomponentsbusiness processes
(process)
modelevent
logs
process mining toolsmonitoring
toolsacts
notifies
uses
fig.1. overview of process mining and monitoring
maintain business process in organizations. however, current approaches to bpm
suﬀer from a lack of automation that would support a smooth transition between
the business world and the it world [14]. the diﬃculties for automating the
transition between both worlds is due to a lack of machine processable semantics.
therefore, [14] proposes the creation o f sbpm systems. such systems combine
semantic web and sws technologies with bpm as a solution for overcoming
these diﬃculties. in a nutshell, sbpm targets accessing the process space (as
registered in event logs) of an enterprize at the knowledge level so as to support
reasoning about business processes, proces s composition, process execution, etc.
the driving force behind sbpm is the use of ontologies [12].
a key aspect of maintaining systems and the processes they support is the
capability to analyze them. this analysis can be real-time and may eventually
lead to some action or can just be used to inform the involved systems/people.
when going sbpm, the main opportunity is that this analysis can be enhanced
because it is based on concepts rather th an syntax. this semantic perspective
is captured by annotating the elements in the systems. so, two challenges arise
in this aspect: (i) how to make use of this semantic data , and (ii) how to mine
this semantic information and, consequently, help in the migration of current
systems to sbpm environments. in this paper we show how process mining and
monitoring techniques successfully utilize semantic data in sbpm systems.
process mining techniques are especially suitable to analyze event logs. the
analysis provided by current process min ing techniques [2,4] can be seen as from
three types: discovery ,conformance andextension (cf. figure 1). the techniques
that focus on discovery mine information based on data in an event log only.
this means that these techniques do not assume the existence of pre-deﬁned
models to describe aspect of processes in the organization. examples are control-
ﬂow mining algorithms that extract a process model based on the dependency
relations that can be inferred among the tasks in the log. the algorithms for
conformance checking verify if logs follow prescribed behaviors and/or rules.
therefore, besides a log, such algorithms also receive as input a model (e.g., a
petri net or a set of rules) that captur es the desired property or behavior to1246 a.k. alves de medeiros et al.
check. examples are the mining algorithms that assess how much the behavior
expressed in a log matches the behavior deﬁned in a model and points out the
diﬀerences, or algorithms used for auditing of logs (in this case, the model is
the property to be veriﬁed). the extension algorithms enhance existing models
based on information discovered in event logs, e.g., algorithms that automatically
discover business rules for the choices in a given model.
process monitoring deals with th e analysis of process instances at runtime by
processing events propagated by the information systems supporting business
processes. the goal of process monitoring is to track the enactment of processes
as they are performed, in order to have timely information about the evolution
of business activities, supporting busines s practitioners in the identiﬁcation of
deviations and the eventual application o f corrective measures. in fact, experi-
ence shows that many factors can alter th e ideal evolution of business processes
(e.g., human intervention, mechanical prob lems, meteorologica l adversities, etc)
and the quick adoption of special measures can mitigate to an important extent
the eventual consequences, thus reducin g or even avoiding derived economical
losses. the importance of process monitoring in bpm is widely acknowledged
and in fact all the main vendors in this sector provide their own solution. two
kinds of monitoring are usually distinguished: (i) active monitoring which is con-
cerned with “real time” propagation of relevant data concerning the enactment
of business processes, such as the status or the execution time; and (ii) passive
monitoring which delivers information abou t process instances upon request.
the ideas presented in this paper are currently being implemented in the
context of the european project super [1]. as stated in [1], super “aims at
providing a semantic-based and contex t-aware framework, based on semantic
web services technology that acquires, o rganizes, shares and uses the knowl-
edge embedded in business processes wit hin existing it systems and software,
and within employees’ heads, in order to make companies more adaptive”. this
semantic framework will support the four phases of the bpm life-cycle.
the remainder of this paper provides an outlook about semantic business
process mining (section 2) and monitori ng (section 3), discusses related work in
the area of semantic analysis (section 4), and presents the conclusion and future
steps (section 5).
2 semantic business process mining
the use of ontologies in sbpm yields two o pportunities for process mining tech-
niques. the ﬁrst opportunity is to make use of the ontological annotations in logs/
models to develop more robust process mining techniques that analyze the logs/
models at the concept level. in this case, it is assumed that event logs and models
indeed link to ontologies. the second opportunity is to use process mining tech-
niques to discover or enhance ontologies based on the data in event logs.
developing semantic process mining techniques
as explained in section 1, current process mining techniques focus on the dis-
covery of models, the conformance between models and logs, and extension ofan outlook on semantic business process mining and monitoring 1247
(process )
modelevent
logsdiscovery
extensionconformance
ontologieslinks to links toreasonerloads,
reasons
fig.2. semantic process mining: basic elements
models based on information derived from event logs (cf. figure 1). however,
the analysis they support is purely syntactic. in other words, these mining tech-
niques are unable to reason over the concepts behind the labels in the log ,t h u st h e
actual semantics behind these labels remain in the head of the business analyst
which has to interpret them. leveraging process mining to the conceptual layer
can enhance state-of-the-art techniques towards more advanced, adaptable and
reusable solutions.
the basic elements to build semantic process mining tools are: ontologies ,
references from elements in logs/models to concepts in ontologies ,a n d ontol-
ogy reasoners (cf. figure 2). ontologies [12] deﬁne the set of shared concepts
necessary for the analysis, and formalize their relationships and properties. the
references associate meanings to labels (i.e., strings) in event logs and/or models
by pointing to concepts deﬁned in ontologies. the reasoner supports reasoning
over the ontologies in order to derive new knowledge, e.g., subsumption, equiv-
alence, etc. the use of onto logies and reasoners caus es an immediate beneﬁt to
process mining techniques: the level of abstraction is raised from the syntactical
level to the semantical level. the following paragraphs sketch some of the ways in
which semantics can aid process mining (some of which have been implemented
in prom [3]).
thediscovery techniques mine models based on event logs. control-ﬂow min-
ing techniques are prominent in this perspective. these techniques focus on the
discovery of a business model that capture the control-ﬂow structure of the tasks
in the log. currently, these techniques mainly discover a ﬂatmodel showing all
the tasks encountered in the log, i.e., a single large model is shown without any
hierarchy or structuring. however, if the tasks in these instances would link to
concepts in ontologies, subsumption relat ions over these ontologies could be used
to aggregate tasks and, therefore, mine hierarchical process models supporting
diﬀerent levels of abstraction. other discovery techniques focus on organizational
mining, which target the discovery of organizational related aspects in event logs.
these algorithms are based on the tasks in the logs and the performers of these
tasks. the main driving force here is the concept of task similarity. in a nutshell,
tasks are considered to be si milar based on their names, performers and context
(neighboring tasks in the process insta nces). when these concepts are linked
to tasks/performers in logs, more robust similarity criteria can be inferred that1248 a.k. alves de medeiros et al.
make use of the conceptual relationships in the ontologies. consequently, better
models can be mined.
theconformance checking techniques verify how compliant a model and a log
are. this model captures properties/requirements that should be fulﬁlled by the
execution of processes. an example of s uch technique is the ltl conformance
checker [2] which allows for the auditing of logs. the problem here is that these
techniques require an exact match between the elements (or strings) in the log
and the corresponding elements in the models. as a consequence, many deﬁned
models cannot be reused over diﬀerent logs because these logs do not contain
the same strings as the elements in the models. when ontologies are used, these
models can be deﬁned over concepts and, as far as the elements in diﬀerent
logs link to the same concepts (or super /sub concepts of these concepts), the
conformance can be assessed without requiring any modiﬁcation of the models
or the logs.
theextension techniques enhance models based on information mined from
event logs. like the conformance checking techniques, the enhancements are only
possible with an exact match between elements in models and logs. thus, the use
of ontologies would bring this match to t he concept level and, therefore, models
could also be extended based on diﬀerent logs.
as mentioned before, several of these ideas are currently being implemented as
semantic plug-ins in the prom tool. actually, the semantic ltl checker analysis
plug-in is already publicly available1. this plug-in extends the original ltl
checker [2] by adding the option to provide concepts as input to the parameters
of ltl formulae. all the semantic plug-ins developed in prom are based on the
following concrete formats for the basic building blocks (cf. figure 2): (i) event
logsare in the sa-mxml ﬁle format, which is a semantically annotated version
of the mxml format already used by prom2; (ii)ontologies are deﬁned in
wsml [10]; and (iii) the wsml 2 reasoner framework3is used to perform all
the necessary reasoning over the ontologies.
using process mining to di scover/enhance ontologies
so far we have focussed on using semantics to enhance process mining tech-
niques. however, there are opportunities in the other directio n too because pro-
cess mining techniques can be used to (i) discover or enhance ontologies and (ii)
automatically infer concepts to elements that are not semantically annotated
but that belong to partially annotated logs/models. when deploying sbpm sys-
tems, a core requirement is that (some of ) the elements in the conﬁgured models
should link to concepts in ontologies b ecause that is how the semantic perspec-
tive is embedded in such systems. therefore, if companies want to go in this
direction, they need to add these semantic annotations to their systems. here,
1this plug-in can be downloaded together with the nightly build for the prom tool at
http://ga1717.tm.tue.nl/dev/prom/nightly/. it can be started by clicking the menu
option “analysis →semantic ltl checker”.
2the schema for the sa-mxml format is available at http://is.tm.tue.nl/research/
processmining/samxml.xsd
3this framework is publicly available at http://tools.deri.org/an outlook on semantic business process mining and monitoring 1249
three options are possible. the ﬁrst one is to manually (i) create all the necessary
ontologies and (ii) annotate the necessary elements in the sbpm systems. the
second option is to use tools to (semi-) automatically discover ontologies based
on the elements in event logs. note that, if necessary, these mined ontologies
can be manually improved. the third option is a combination of the previous
two in which models/logs are partially annotated by a person and mining tools
are used to discover the other missing annotations for the remaining elements in
logs/models. discovery and extension p rocess mining techniques can play a role
in the last two options.
basically, three opportunities exist to e xtract semantics from logs. first, pro-
cess mining techniques can be created to de rive relationships between concepts
for activities and performers. this scenario assumes that the subsumption rela-
tionships for the concepts in an ontology have not been deﬁned. a task is usually
only executed by a group of performers who have certain proper ties (e.g. organi-
zational units, skills) for a given process, and these properties can be expressed
by the concepts linked to these performers. this way subsumption relationships
can be discovered from event logs that contain semantic information. second,
if the log is partially annotated then mining techniques can be developed to
automatically annotate the tasks and/or performers that do not link to any con-
cepts. third, if there are no semantic annotations, concepts that describe tasks
or performers can be discovered from process logs by applying the existing min-
ing techniques to discover these concepts /ontologies. the mined organizational
structures such as roles and teams can be good candidates for concepts. note
that a group of performers executing a same task might belong to the same role
and have the same role concept. performe rs involved in the same instances might
have the same team concept.
3 semantic business process monitoring
reaching the level of automation demanded by current businesses requires rea-
soning over the knowledge gained by applying mining techniques combined with
pre-existing contextual domain knowledge about some speciﬁc business process.
we refer as semantic business process monitoring to the enhancement of busi-
ness process monitoring with formal semantic descriptions to achieve this. we
propose a 5-phases approach, observe - evaluate - detect - diagnose - resolve ,
structured around an extensive use of ontologies as the core means for deﬁning
formal conceptualizations, and problem-solving methods (psm) as composable
sws encapsulating the expertise of the monitoring tool [6,20].
figure 3 depicts our approach to semantic business process monitoring. the
process starts with the observe phase, which is in charge of gathering information
populated by the it infrastructure. the evaluate phase uses this information for
computing process metrics su ch as the execution time, the number of failures, etc.
thedetect phase follows and uses previously computed metrics and monitoring
data in order to detect or predict process d eviations and special situations one
might want to track. finally, once a pro cess deviation has been identiﬁed, the1250 a.k. alves de medeiros et al.
bpm
ontologiesdomain 
speci ﬁc 
knowledgedata 
warehouseresolution
strategiesreport
templates
fig.3. phases of semantic business process monitoring
diagnose phase is in charge of determining the cause which can eventually be
used during the resolve step for deﬁning and applying corrective actions. in
parallel, at any time, we have to present information to the user about the
overall monitoring process. each of these monitoring phases, but in particular
detection, diagnosis, and resolution, present interesting challenges that have
to be addressed and where knowledge-bas ed techniques can help to improve the
current state-of-the-art. we shall next identify the main opportunities that arise
and depict the approach we envision for semantic business process monitoring.
observe. the observe phase is concerned with obtaining monitoring informa-
tion and lifting it into a semantic form. this phase covers the so-called extract-
transform-load step which requires integrating a large amount of disparate
information coming from several distributed and heterogeneous systems. on-
tologies [12] are therefore a particularly well-suited candidate for supporting
this task. an initial version of such an ontology has been deﬁned in [18] based
on the mxml format deﬁned within the prom framework [3]. once in an onto-
logical form, the monitoring information supports navigation, manipulation, and
querying at the knowledge level, which is closer to human understanding and
can potentially lead to important impro vements in the user interface. in fact,
in a recent report by gartner [19] meta data management is presented as the
most important capability that business intelligence tools should integrate. on-
tologies are therefore a key enabling technology for achieving this. additionally,
semantic monitoring data is amenable to automated reasoning thus enabling the
application of knowledge-based technologies as described next. among the pos-
sibilities brought, consistency checking can be applied in this phase for detecting
anomalies in the monitoring data itself thus reducing the noise for subsequent
analysis and potentially enhancing quality of the analysis results.
evaluate. this phase is in charge of the timely computation of process met-
rics, such as the execution time or the number of failures. we can distinguish
between generic metrics that can be com puted for every process, and domain-
speciﬁc metrics [8]. to support business practitioners, we envision the deﬁnitionan outlook on semantic business process mining and monitoring 1251
of domain-speciﬁc metrics using a metric ontology, and the capability for users
to deﬁne sws that can be invoked by platforms like the irs-iii [6] to perform
the metric computation. in a somewhat recursive way, we envisage formalizing
the analysis results themselves . this provides independence with respect to the
engines or algorithms utilized for performing the calculations, and supports a
semantically enhanced view over the res ults. more importantly, an ontological
deﬁnition of analysis results, enhances the overall body of knowledge for sup-
porting further reasoning. in fact, it is quite usual that taking a decision requires
performing and correlating diverse analysis, e.g., by combining the processes that
did not perform well, with the resources involved in them, one could identify the
bottlenecks. formalizing the results enables reasoning over the computationally
expensive analysis results within runtime monitoring tasks, as well as it allows for
automatically combining them in order to perform more complex evaluations. in
this sense we envision the use of sws tec hnologies for supporting the deﬁnition
of analysis processes as the orchestrat ion of diﬀerent analysis techniques.
detect. the detect phase is in charge of identifying or predicting deviations
with respect to the expected behavior of a process. the simplest approach is
based on the deﬁnition of thresholds with respect to certain metrics. more com-
plex solutions can be applied by approaching detection as a classiﬁcation prob-
lem [8]. our approach can support the seamless application of knowledge-based
algorithms, e.g., classiﬁcation psms [20], the enhancement of existing algorithms
with semantic information, or even the runtime adaptation of the detection pro-
cess. it is known that selecting the appropriate algorithm to apply given the task
at hand is particularly important [5,8]. having an extensive conceptualization of
the bpm domain can indeed be particularly beneﬁcial in order to select the pre-
sumably most suitable algorithm. this can be achieved by performing dynamic
selection of sws implementing some algor ithm on the basis of the characteristics
of the domain. for example, knowing the kind of process analyzed, e.g., shipping
process, we can identify the typical or mor e relevant deviations, e.g., deadline
exceeded, and select the algorithm acco rdingly. addition al advantages can be
gained if relations between metrics and domain data, as well as mining results
are modelled, allowing the system to overcome the lack of information earlier in
the execution of the process. finally, con textual knowledge can also strengthen
existing algorithms like data mining approaches to symptoms detection [8] where
this knowledge can play an important role supporting the enhancement of the
algorithm with semantic feature selection.
diagnose. once any deviation has been detected or predicted, we have to diag-
nosethe origin of the problem. in the bpm community, diagnosis often depends
on the actual interpretation of the data by the user [8,16]. in order to do so the
detection phase is often based on some structured approach that can be rela-
tively easily understood by humans, e.g., decision trees. diagnosis has been a
popular topic in artiﬁcial intelligence, and has led to a quite exhaustive char-
acterization of the task as well as to a wide range of implementations [5,20]
which it would be desirable to beneﬁt from. knowledge-based methods have1252 a.k. alves de medeiros et al.
been applied to diagnosing automated systems (where some behavioral model
typically exists), as well as to the diseases (where this kind of model is typi-
cally missing). it is therefore safe to assume that we can make use of the wealth
of research on diagnosis for semantic business process monitoring. it is worth
noting in this respect that a close integration between monitoring and mining
can allow us to reuse mined process models for informing the diagnosis algo-
rithm. this can be of great advantage wh en no prescribed pr ocess model exists
or when the prescribed model diﬀers to an important extent from the actual
mined model.
resolve. the ﬁnal phase is concerned with the design and application of a
resolution strategy for addressing some previously diagnosed process deviation.
resolution is by far the most complex task within our approach and in fact
little work besides ad-hoc exception handling or undo and retry has been done
within the bpm community [13,16]. these approaches cannot cope with the
wide range of deviations that can arise during the enactment of a process and
fully automated handling of any process deviation is simply not realistic due to
unforeseen situations aﬀecting user-deﬁned and process-speciﬁc conditions [16].
hence, in a similar vein to [16] we contemplate the application of case-based
reasoning for retrieving, adapting, and applying resolution strategies in an at-
tempt to deal with previously diagnosed deviations. like in the previous phases,
the resolution strategies will be deﬁned as orchestrations of sws, allowing users
to specify their own strategies by reusin g and combining problem-solving exper-
tise over their domain speciﬁc terms. this approach is inline with that proposed
by [15] that can in fact serve as a basis for deﬁning general resolution templates.
we expect however that the capability for executing psms and our extensive
conceptualization of the bpm domain will enable the creation of more complex
strategies. for instance, organizational knowledge can support the escalation
of tasks [22], rescheduling based on conﬁguration problem-solving can allow
adapting resource allocation, or even planning and scheduling using reusable
and equivalent process fragments can s upport the implementation of process
escalations by deg rading the quality of service [22].
4 related work
the idea of using semantics to perform process analysis is not new [7,11,14,17,21].
in 2002, casati et al. [7] introduced the hppm intelligent process data ware-
house (pdd) , in which taxonomies are used to add semantics to process exe-
cution data and, therefore, support more business-like analysis for the provided
reports. the work in [11] is a follow-up of the work in [7]. it presents a complete
architecture for the analysis, prediction, monitoring, control and optimization of
process executions in business proces s management systems (bpmss). this set
of tools suite is called business process intelligence (bpi) . the main diﬀerence
of these two approaches to ours is that (i) taxonomies are used to capture thean outlook on semantic business process mining and monitoring 1253
semantic aspects (in our case, ontologies are used), and (ii) these taxonomies
are ﬂat (i.e., no subsumption relations between concepts are supported). hepp
et al. [14] proposes merging semantic web, semantic web services , and business
process management (bpm) techniques to build semantic bpm systems. this
visionary paper pinpoints the role of ontologies (and reasoners) while performing
semantic analysis. however, the authors do not elaborate on the opportunities
and challenges for semantic process mining and monitoring. the works by sell
et al. [21] and o’riain et al. [17] are related to ours because the authors also use
ontologies to provide for the semantic analysis of systems. the main diﬀerence
is the kind of supported analysis, since their work can be seen as the extension
of olap tools with semantics. the work in [17] shows how to use semantics to
enhance the business analysis function of detecting the core business of compa-
nies. this analysis is based on the so-called q10 forms. our paper is the ﬁrst one
to provide an outlook on semantic process mining and monitoring techniques.
5 conclusions and future work
this paper has presented several direct ions for the development of semantic
process mining and monitoring tools. these tools can be used to analyze sbpm
systems. the main opportunity provided by such systems is the link between
the generated events (necessary for analysis) and the actual concepts they rep-
resent . this link is achieved by annotating the elements (models, events etc)
in sbpm systems with concepts in ontol ogies. however, this same opportu-
nity also raises two challenges. the ﬁrst one is how to make use of this se-
mantic perspective in process mining and monitoring tools. for the develop-
ment of semantic process mining tools, we have proposed a framework com-
posed of three building blocks (annotated event logs, ontologies and reasoners)
and have discussed diﬀerent ways in which techniques aiming at the discovery,
conformance or extension perspectives could go semantic. for the monitoring
tools, we have explained a ﬁve-phase approach (observe, evaluate, detect, diag-
nose and resolve) in which knowledge-based techniques play an essential role.
the second challenge is how to mine the semantic information and, therefore,
help in the migration of current information systems to sbpm environments.
here we have illustrate how process mining techniques could use events relat-
ing to tasks and performers to (i) automatically discover or enhance ontologies,
and (ii) help in the semantic annotation of the elements in information sys-
tems.
as indicated throughout the paper, some of the presented ideas have already
been implemented in the context of the super european project. in fact, our
future work will proceed in this directio n (the development of further ideas in
the sbpm environment deﬁned in super).
acknowledgements. this research is supported by the european project
super [1].1254 a.k. alves de medeiros et al.
references
1. european project super - semantics utilised for process management withing
and between enterprises. http://www.ip-super.org/
2. van der aalst, w.m.p., de beer, h.t., van dongen, b.f.: process mining and
veriﬁcation of properties: an approach based on temporal logic. in: meersman,
r., tari, z. (eds.) on the move to meaningful internet systems 2005: coopis,
doa, and odbase. lncs, vol. 3760, pp. 130–147. springer, heidelberg (2005)
3. van der aalst, w.m.p., van dongen, b.f., g¨ unther, c.w., mans, r.s., alves de
medeiros, a.k., rozinat, a., rubin, v., song, m., verbeek, h.m.w., weijters,
a.j.m.m.: prom 4.0: comprehensive support for real process analysis. in: kleijn,
j., yakovlev, a. (eds.) application and theory of petri nets and other models of
concurrency (icatpn 2007). lncs, vol. 4546, pp. 484–494. springer, heidelberg
(2007)
4. van der aalst, w.m.p., van dongen, b.f., herbst, j., maruster, l., schimm, g.,
weijters, a.j.m.m.: workﬂow mining: a survey of issues and approaches. data
and knowledge engineering 47(2), 237–267 (2003)
5. benjamins, r.: problem-solving methods for diagnosis and their role in knowledge
acquisition. int. journal of expert systems: research & applications 8(2), 93–120
(1995)
6. cabral, l., domingue, j., galizia, s., gugliotta, a., tanasescu, v., pedrinaci, c.,
norton, b.: irs-iii: a broker for semantic web services based applications. in:
cruz, i., decker, s., allemang, d., preist, c., schwabe, d., mika, p., uschold, m.,
aroyo, l. (eds.) iswc 2006. lncs, vol. 4273, pp. 201–214. springer, heidelberg
(2006)
7. casati, f., shan, m.-c.: semantic analysis of business process executions. in:
jensen, c.s., jeﬀery, k.g., pokorn´ y, j.,ˇsaltenis, s., bertino, e., b¨ ohm, k., jarke,
m. (eds.) edbt 2002. lncs, vol. 2287, pp. 287–296. springer, heidelberg (2002)
8. castellanos, m., casati, f., dayal, u., shan, m.-c.: a comprehensive and auto-
mated approach to intelligent business processes execution analysis. distributed
and parallel databases 16(3), 239–273 (2004)
9. dumas, m., van der aalst, w.m.p., ter hofstede, a.h.m.: process-aware informa-
tion systems: bridging people and software through process technology. wiley &
sons, chichester (2005)
10. fensel, d., lausen, h., polleres, a., de bruijn, j., stollberg, m., roman, d.,
domingue, j.: enabling semantic web services: the web service modeling on-
tology. springer, heidelberg (2007)
11. grigori, d., casati, f., castellanos, m., dayal, u., sayal, m., shan, m.-c.: business
process intelligence. comput ers in industry 53(3), 321–343 (2004)
12. gruber, t.r.: a translation approach to portable ontology speciﬁcations. knowl-
edge acquisition 5(2), 199–220 (1993)
13. hagen, c., alonso, g.: exception handling in workﬂow management systems. ieee
transactions on software engineering 26(10), 943–958 (2000)
14. hepp, m., leymann, f., domingue, j., wahler, a., fensel, d.: semantic business
process management: a vision towards using semantic web services for business
process management. in: icebe, pp. 535–540 (2005)
15. klein, m., dellarocas, c.: a knowledge-based approach to handling exceptions
inworkﬂow systems. comput. suppor ted coop. work 9(3-4), 399–412 (2000)
16. luo, z., sheth, a., kochut, k., miller, j.: exception handling in workﬂow systems.
applied intelligence 13(2), 125–147 (2000)an outlook on semantic business process mining and monitoring 1255
17. o’riain, s., spyns, p.: enhancing the business analysis function with semantics.
in: meersman, r., tari, z. (eds.) on the move to meaningful internet systems 2006:
coopis, doa, gada, and odbase. lncs, vol. 4275, pp. 818–835. springer,
heidelberg (2006)
18. pedrinaci, c., domingue, j.: towards an ontology for process monitoring and
mining. in: semantic business process and product lifecycle management (sbpm
2007), innsbruck, austria (june 2007)
19. schlegel, k., hostmann, b., bitterer, a.: magic quadrant for business intelligence
platforms, 1q07. gartner ras core research note g00145507, gartner (january
2007)
20. schreiber, g., akkermans, h., anjewierden, a., de hoog, r., shadbolt, n., van
de velde, w., wielinga, b.: knowledge engineering and management: the com-
monkads methodology. mit press, cambridge (1999)
21. sell, d., cabral, l., motta, e., domingue, j., pacheco, r.: adding semantics to
business intelligence. in: dexa workshops, pp. 543–547. ieee computer society
press, los alamitos (2005)
22. van der aalst, w.m.p., rosemann, m., dumas, m.: deadline-based escalation
in process-aware information system s. decision support syste ms 43(2), 492–511
(2007)