process mininginhealthcare
acasestudy
r.s. mans,m.h. schonenberg,m. song,w.m.p. vanderaalst
eindhoven universityoftechnology, p.o.box513,nl-5600mb,eind hoven, thenetherlands
{r.s.mans,m.h.schonenberg, m.s.song,w.m.p.v.d.aalst }@tue.nl
p.j.m. bakker
academic medical center,university ofamsterdam,department ofinn ovation and processmanagement, amsterdam,thenetherlands
p.j.bakker@amc.uva.nl
keywords: process mining, healthcare processes
abstract: to gain competitive advantage, hospitals try to streamline their processes. in order to do so, it is essential
to have an accurate view of the “careﬂows” under consideration. in this paper, we apply process mining
techniques to obtain meaningful knowledge about these ﬂows, e.g., to d iscover typical paths followed by
particular groups of patients. this is a non-trivial task given the dynamic nature of healthcare processes. the
paper demonstrates the applicability of process mining using a real case o f a gynecological oncology process
in a dutch hospital. using a variety of process mining techniques, we analyz ed the healthcare process from
three different perspectives: (1) the control ﬂow perspective, (2 ) the organizational perspective and (3) the
performance perspective. in order to do so we extracted relevant e vent logs from the hospitals information
systemandanalyzedtheselogsusingthepromframework. theresultss howthatprocessminingcanbeused
toprovide newinsights thatfacilitate the improvement of existingcareﬂows.
1 introduction
in a competitive health-care market, hospitals
have to focus on ways to streamline their processes
inorder todeliver high qualitycare whileatthesame
time reducing costs (anyanwu et al., 2003). further-
more,alsoonthegovernmentalsideandonthesideof
the health insurance companies, more and more pres-
sure is put on hospitals to work in the most efﬁcient
way as possible, whereas in the future, an increase in
thedemand forcare isexpected.
a complicating factor is that healthcare is charac-
terized by highly complexand extremely ﬂexiblepa-
tient care processes, also referred to as “careﬂows”.
moreover, many disciplines are involved for which
it is found that they are working in isolation and
hardlyhaveanyideaaboutwhathappenswithinother
disciplines. another issue is that within healthcare
many autonomous, independently developed applica-
tions are found (lenz et al., 2002). a consequence
of this all is that it is not known what happens in a
healthcare process for a group of patients with the
samediagnosis .
the concept of process mining provides an in-teresting opportunity for providing a solution to this
problem. process mining (van der aalst et al., 2003)
aims at extracting process knowledge from so-called
“event logs” which may originate from all kinds of
systems, like enterprise information systems or hos-
pital information systems. typically, these event
logscontaininformationaboutthestart/completionof
process steps together with related context data (e.g.
actors and resources). furthermore, process mining
is a very broad area both in terms of (1) applica-
tions(frombankstoembeddedsystems)and(2)tech-
niques.
thispaperfocussesonthe applicability ofprocess
mining in the healthcare domain. process mining has
already been successfully applied in the service in-
dustry (van der aalst et al., 2007a). in this paper, we
demonstratetheapplicabilityofprocessminingtothe
healthcaredomain. wewillshowhowprocessmining
canbeusedforobtaininginsightsrelatedtocareﬂows,
e.g., the identiﬁcation of care paths and (strong) col-
laboration between departments. to this end, in sec-
tion 3, we will use several mining techniques which
will also show the diversity of process mining tech-
niques available, like control ﬂow discovery but alsothediscovery of organizational aspects.
in this paper, we present a case study where we
use raw data of the amc hospital in amsterdam, a
large academic hospital in the netherlands. this raw
data contains data about a group of 627 gynecolog-
ical oncology patients treated in 2005 and 2006 and
for which all diagnostic and treatment activities have
beenrecordedforﬁnancialpurposes. notethatwedid
notuseanya-prioriknowledgeaboutthecareprocess
ofthisgroupofpatientsandthatwealsodidnothave
any process model at hand.
today’s business intelligence (bi) tools used in
the healthcare domain, like cognos, business ob-
jects,orsapbi,typicallylookataggregatedataseen
from an external perspective (frequencies, averages,
utilization, service levels, etc.). these bi tools fo-
cus on performance indicators such as the number of
knee operations, the length of waiting lists, and the
success rate of surgery. process mining looks “inside
the process” at different abstraction levels. so, in the
context of a hospital, unlike bi tools, we are more
concerned with the care paths followed by individual
patients and whether certain procedures are followed
or not.
thispaperisstructuredasfollows: section2pro-
videsanoverviewofprocessmining. insection3we
will show the applicability of process mining in the
healthcare domain using data obtained for a group of
627 gynecological oncology patients. section 4 con-
cludes thepaper.
2 processmining
process mining is applicable to a wide range of
systems. thesesystemsmaybepureinformationsys-
tems (e.g., erp systems) or systems where the hard-
ware plays a more prominent role (e.g., embedded
systems). the only requirement is that the system
produces event logs , thus recording (parts of) the ac-
tual behavior.
an interesting class of information systems that
produce event logs are the so-called process-aware
information systems (paiss) (dumas et al., 2005).
examples are classical workﬂow management sys-
tems (e.g. staffware), erp systems (e.g. sap), case
handling systems (e.g. flower), pdm systems (e.g.
windchill), crm systems (e.g. microsoft dynamics
crm), middleware (e.g., ibm’s websphere), hospi-
tal information systems (e.g., chipsoft), etc. these
systems provide very detailed information about the
activities that have been executed.
however, not only paiss are recording events.
also, in a typical hospital there is a wide variety ofsystems that record events. for example, in an inten-
sive care unit, a system can record which examina-
tionsortreatmentsapatientundergoesandalsoitcan
recordoccurringcomplicationsforapatient. forara-
diology department the whole process of admittance
of a patient till the archival of the photograph can be
recorded. however, frequently these systems are lim-
ited to one department only. however, systems used
for billing purposes have to ensure that all services
deliveredtothepatientwillbepaid. inorderforthese
systems to work properly, information from different
systems needs to be collected so that it is clear which
activities have been performed in the care process of
a patient. in this way, these systems within the hos-
pital can contain information about processes within
one department but also acrossdepartments. this in-
formationcanbeusedforimprovingprocesseswithin
departmentsitselforimprovingtheservicesofferedto
patients.
the goal of process mining is to extract in-
formation (e.g., process models) from these logs,
i.e., process mining describes a family of a-
posteriori analysistechniquesexploitingtheinforma-
tion recorded in the event logs. typically, these ap-
proaches assume that it is possible to sequentially
record events such that each event refers to an ac-
tivity (i.e., a well-deﬁned step in the process) and is
related to a particular case (i.e., a process instance).
furthermore, some mining techniques use additional
informationsuchastheperformerororiginatorofthe
event (i.e., the person/resource executing or initiating
the activity), the timestamp of the event, or data el-
ements recorded with the event (e.g., the size of an
order).
process mining addresses the problem that most
“process/system owners” have limited information
about what is actually happening. in practice, there
is often a signiﬁcant gap between what is prescribed
or supposed to happen, and what actuallyhappens.
only a concise assessment of reality, which process
miningstrivestodeliver,canhelpinverifyingprocess
models, and ultimately be used in system or process
redesign efforts.
the idea of process mining is to discover, mon-
itor and improve real processes (i.e., not assumed
processes) by extracting knowledge from event logs.
weconsiderthreebasictypesofprocessmining(fig-
ure1): (1) discovery ,(2)conformance , and(3)exten-
sion.
discovery : traditionally, process mining has
been focusing on discovery , i.e., deriving informa-
tion about the original process model, the organiza-
tional context, and execution properties from enact-
ment logs. an example of a technique addressing themodels
analyzesrecords
events, e.g., 
messages,
transactions,
etc.specifies
configures
implements
analyzessupports/
controls
people machines
organizationscomponentsbusiness processes
figure1: threetypesofprocessmining: (1)discovery,(2)
conformance, and(3) extension.
control ﬂow perspective is the α-algorithm (van der
aalstetal.,2004),whichconstructsapetrinetmodel
describingthebehaviorobservedintheeventlog. itis
important to mention that there is no a-priori model,
i.e.,basedonaneventlogsomemodelisconstructed.
however, process mining is not limited to process
models (i.e., control ﬂow) and recent process mining
techniques are more and more focusing on other per-
spectives, e.g., the organizational perspective, perfor-
mance perspective or the data perspective. for exam-
ple, there are approaches to extract social networks
from event logs and analyze them using social net-
workanalysis(vanderaalstetal.,2005). thisallows
organizations to monitor how people, groups, or soft-
ware/system components are working together. also,
there are approaches to visualize performance related
information, e.g. there are approaches which graph-
ically shows the bottlenecks and all kinds of perfor-
mance indicators, e.g., average/variance of the total
ﬂow timeor thetimespent between twoactivities.
conformance : there is an a-priori model. this
model is used to check if reality conforms to the
model. for example, there may be a process model
indicating that purchase orders of more than one mil-
lioneurorequiretwochecks. anotherexampleisthe
checking of the so-called “four-eyes” principle. con-
formance checking may be used to detect deviations,
tolocateandexplainthesedeviations,andtomeasure
theseverity of these deviations.
extension : there is an a-priori model. this
model is extended with a new aspect or perspective,
i.e., the goal is not to check conformance but to en-
rich the model with the data in the event log. an ex-
ampleistheextensionofaprocessmodelwithperfor-
mance data, i.e., some a-priori process model is used
on which bottlenecks areprojected.
atthispointintimetherearematuretoolssuchas
thepromframework(vanderaalstetal.,2007b),fea-
turing an extensive set of analysis techniques which
can be applied to real-life logs while supporting thewhole spectrum depicted infigure 1.
3 healthcareprocess
in this section, we want to show the applicability
of process mining in healthcare. however, as health-
care processes are characterized by the fact that sev-
eral organizational units can be involved in the treat-
mentprocessofpatientsandthattheseorganizational
units often have their own speciﬁc it applications, it
becomes clear that getting data, which is related to
healthcare processes, is not an easy task. in spite of
this,systemsusedinhospitalsneedtoprovideaninte-
grated view on all these it applications as it needs to
beguaranteedthatthehospitalgetspaidforeveryser-
vice delivered to a patient. consequently, these kind
of systems contain process-related information about
healthcare processes and are therefore an interesting
candidate for providing the data needed for process
mining.
to this end, as case study for showing the ap-
plicability of process mining in health care, we use
raw data collected by the billing system of the amc
hospital. this raw data contains information about a
group of 627 gynecological oncology patients treated
in 2005 and 2006 and for which all diagnostic and
treatment activities have been recorded. the process
for gynecological oncology patients is supported by
several different departments, e.g. gynecology, radi-
ology and several labs.
for this data set, we have extracted event logs
fromtheamc’sdatabaseswhereeacheventrefersto
aservicedeliveredtoapatient. asthedataiscoming
from a billing system, we have to face the interesting
problem that for each service delivered for a patient
it is only known on which daythe service has been
delivered. in other words, we do not have any infor-
mation about the actual timestamps of the start and
completion of the service delivered. consequently,
the ordering of events which happen on the same day
do not necessarily conform with the order in which
events ofthat day wereexecuted.
nevertheless, as the log contains realdata about
the services delivered to gynecological oncology pa-
tients it is still an interesting and representative data
set for showing the applicability of process mining
in healthcare as still many techniques can be applied.
note that the log contains 376 different event names
which indicates that we are dealing with a non-trivial
careﬂow process.
in the remainder of this section we will focus on
obtaining, in an explorative way, insights into the gy-
necologicaloncologyhealthcareprocess . so,wewillonlyfocusonthe discovery partofprocessmining,in-
steadofthe conformance andextension part. further-
more, obtaining these insights should not be limited
to one perspective only. therefore, in sections 3.2.1,
3.2.2 and 3.2.3, we focus on the discovery of care
paths followed by patients , the discovery of organi-
zational aspects and the discovery of performance
related information , respectively. this also demon-
strates the diversity of process mining techniques
available. however, as will be discussed in section
3.1, we ﬁrst need to perform some preprocessing be-
fore being able to present information on the right
level of detail.
3.1 preprocessingof logs
the log of the amc hospital contains a huge amount
of distinct activities, of which many are rather low
level activities, i.e., events at a low abstraction level.
for example, for our purpose, the logged lab activi-
ties are at a too low abstraction level, e.g. determina-
tion of chloride, lactic acid and erythrocyte sedimen-
tation rate (esr). we would like to consider all these
low level lab tests as a single lab test. mining a log
that contains many distinct activities would result in
a too detailed spaghetti-like model, that is difﬁcult to
understand. hence, we ﬁrst apply some preprocess-
ing on the logs to obtain interpretable results during
mining. during preprocessing we want to “simplify”
the log by removing the excess of low level activi-
ties. in addition, our goal is to consider only events
at the department level. in this way, we can, for ex-
ample, focus on care paths and interactions between
departments. we applied two different approaches to
do this.
our ﬁrst approach is to detect a representative for
the lower level activities. in our logs, this approach
can be applied to the before mentioned lab activities.
in the logs we can ﬁnd an activity that can serve as
representative for the lab activities, namely the activ-
ity that is always executed when samples are offered
tothelab. allother(lowlevel)labactivitiesinthelog
aresimplydiscarded.
the log also contains groups of low level activ-
ities for which there is no representative. for in-
stance at the radiology department many activities
canoccur (e.g.,echoabdomen, thoraxandctbrain),
but the logs do not contain a single event that oc-
curs for every visit to this department, like a reg-
istration event for example. we apply aggregation
for low level activities in groups without a repre-
sentative by (1) deﬁning a representative, (2) map-
ping all activities from the group to this representa-
tive and (3) removing repetitions of events from thelog. for example, for the radiology department we
deﬁne “radiology” as representative. a log that orig-
inally contains “ ...,ultrasound scan abdomen,
chest x-ray, ct scan brain,... ”, would con-
tain “...,radiology,... ”, after mapping low level
radiology activities to this representative and remov-
ingany duplicates.
3.2 mining
in this section, we present some results obtained
through a detailed analysis of the acm’s event log
for the gynecological oncology process. we concen-
trate on the discovery part to show actual situations
(e.g. control ﬂows, organizational interactions) in the
healthcare process. more speciﬁcally, we elaborate
on mining results based on three major perspectives
(i.e. control ﬂow, organizational, performance per-
spectives) inprocess mining.
3.2.1 control flow perspective
one of the most promising mining techniques is con-
trol ﬂow mining which automatically derives process
models from process logs. the generated process
model reﬂects the actual process as observed through
real process executions. if we generate process mod-
elsfromhealthcareprocesslogs,theygiveinsightinto
care paths for patients. until now, there are several
process mining algorithms such as the α-mining al-
gorithm, heuristic mining algorithm, region mining
algorithm, etc (van der aalst et al., 2004; weijters
and van der aalst, 2003; van dongen et al., 2007).
in this paper, we use the heuristic mining algorithm,
since it can deal with noise and exceptions, and en-
ables users to focus on the main process ﬂow instead
of on every detail of the behavior appearing in the
process log (weijters and van der aalst, 2003). fig-
ure 2 shows the process model for all cases obtained
using the heuristics miner. despite its ability to fo-
cus on the most frequent paths, the process, depicted
in figure 2, is still spaghetti-like and too complex to
understand easily.
since processes in the healthcare domain do not
haveasinglekindofﬂowbutalotofvariantsbasedon
patients and diseases, it is not surprising that the de-
rived process model isspaghetti-like and convoluted.
one of the methods for handling this problem is
breaking down a log into two or more sub-logs until
these become simple enough to be analyzed clearly.
we apply clustering techniques to divide a process
logintoseveralgroups(i.e. clusters),wherethecases
in the same cluster have similar properties. cluster-
ing is a very useful technique for logs which contain
many cases following different procedures, as is thefigure2: derived process model for allcases.
figure 3: logclusteringresult.
usual case in healthcare systems. depending on the
interest (e.g., exceptional or frequent procedures), a
cluster can be selected. there are several clustering
techniques available. among these, we use the som
(selforganizingmap)algorithmtoclusterthelogbe-
causeofitsperformance(i.e.,speed). figure3shows
the clustering result obtained by applying the trace
clustering plug-in. nine clusters are obtained from
the log. in the ﬁgure, the instances in the same cell
belong to the same cluster. the ﬁgure also shows
a contour map based on the number of instances in
each cell. it is very useful to take a quick glance at
theclusters–arethereclusterswithmanysimilarities
(high land), or are there many clusters with excep-
tional cases (sea).
by using this approach, we obtained several clus-
ters of reasonable size. in this paper we show only
theresultforthebiggestcluster,containing352cases
allwithsimilarproperties. figure4showstheheuris-tic net derived from the biggest cluster. the result is
much simpler than the model in figure 2. further-
more, the ﬁtness of this model is “good”. the model
representstheprocedureformostcasesinthecluster,
i.e., these cases “ﬁt” in the generated process model.
a closer inspection of this main cluster by domain
experts conﬁrmed that this is indeed main stream fol-
lowed by most gynecological oncology patients.
when discussing the result with the people in-
volved in the process, it was noted that patients, re-
ferred to the amc by another hospital, only visit the
outpatient clinic once or twice. these patients are
already diagnosed, and afterwards they are referred
to another department, like radiotherapy, for treat-
ment and which is then responsible for the treatment
process. also, very ill patients are immediately re-
ferred to another department for treatment after their
ﬁrstvisit.
3.2.2 organizational perspective
there are several process mining techniques that ad-
dress organizational perspective, e.g., organizational
mining, social network mining, mining staff assign-
mentrules,etc. (vanderaalstetal.,2005). inthispa-
per,weelaborateonsocialnetworkminingtoprovide
insightsintothecollaborationbetweendepartmentsin
thehospital. thesocialnetworkminerallowsforthe
discoveryofsocialnetworksfromprocesslogs. since
there are several social network analysis techniques
and research results available, the generated social
network allows for analysis of social relations be-
tween originators involving process executions. fig-figure4: process modelfromthe biggestcluster.
ure 5 shows the derived social network. to derive the
network, we used the handover of work metric (van
der aalst et al., 2005) that measures the frequency of
transfersof workamong departments.
the network shows the relationships between
originatorsaboveacertainthreshold. originators,for
which all relationships are below the speciﬁc thresh-
old, appear as isolated circles. the originators that
were highly involved in the process appear as larger
dots in the ﬁgure. these results are useful to de-
tect whether there are frequent interactions between
originators (departments, in our case). in hospitals
there are many departments that interact and hand
overworktoeachother. theminingresultshowsthat
thegeneralclinicalchemicallabishighlyinvolvedin
theprocessandinteractswithmanydepartments. the
outpatient clinic (oc) for gynecology and obstetrics
isalsoofteninvolved, but isnot directlyconnected to
all other departments. for instance there is no rela-
tionship (within this threshold) between this oc and
the vascular lab. this means that there is no, or not
much, interaction between these twodepartments.
when this result was presented to the people in-
volved in the process, they conﬁrmed the strong col-
laboration with the departments shown in figure 5.
however, they were surprised about the rather strong
collaboration with the dietics department. neverthe-
less,thiscanbeexplainedbythefactthat,whenapa-
tienthastogotoseveralchemotherapysessions,then
avisittothe dietician isalsooftenneeded.
moreover, they also noted that the many interac-
tions between the lab and other departments is mis-leading as all the examinations are requested by gy-
necological oncology and not by the lab. this can be
explained by the many lab tests and resulting interac-
tions between thelaband other departments.
3.2.3 performance perspective
processminingprovidesseveralperformanceanalysis
techniques. amongthese,thedottedchartisamethod
suitableforcasehandlingprocesseswhichareﬂexible
andknowledgeintensivebusinessprocessesandfocus
not on the routing of work or the activities but on the
case (e.g. careﬂows). in this paper, we use the dotted
chart to show overall events and performance infor-
mationofthelog. figure6showsthedottedchart. in
thechart,eventsaredisplayedasdots,andthetimeis
measured along the horizontal axis of the chart. the
vertical axis represents case ids and events are col-
ored according to their task ids. it supports several
time options such as actual, relative, logical, etc. in
the diagram, we use relative time which shows the
duration from the beginning of an instance to a cer-
tain event. thus it indicates the case duration of each
instance. it also provides performance metrics such
as the time of the ﬁrst and of the last events, case du-
rations, the number of events in an instance, etc. for
example, in the ﬁgure (top right, average spread in
seconds), the average case duration isabout 49 days.
users can obtain useful insights from the chart,
e.g.,itiseasytoﬁndinterestingpatternsbylookingat
the dotted chart. in figure 6, the density of events on
the left side of the diagram is higher than the density
ofthoseontherightside. thisshowsthatinitiallypa-figure 5: socialnetwork (handover of work metrics).
figure6: dotted chart.
tients have more diagnosis and treatment events than
in the later parts of the process. when we focus on
the long duration instances (i.e. the instances hav-
ing events in the right side of the diagram), it can be
observedthattheymainlyconsistofregularconsulta-tion(reddot),consultationbyphone(reddot),andlab
test (violet dot) activities. it reﬂects the situation that
patientshaveregularconsultationbyvisitingorbeing
phonedbythehospitalandsometimeshaveatestafter
or before the consultation. it is also easy to discoverpatternsintheoccurrencesofactivities. forexample,
seven instances have the pattern that consists of a lab
testand an admittance tothenursing ward activities.
when the results were presented to the people in-
volvedintheprocess,theyconﬁrmedthepatternsthat
we found. furthermore, for the last pattern they indi-
cated that the pattern deals about patients who get a
chemotherapy regularly. the day before, they come
foralab testand when theresult isgood, they get the
next chemotherapy.
4 conclusion
in this paper, we have focussed on the applicabil-
ity of process mining in the healthcare domain. for
ourcasestudy,wehaveuseddatacomingfromanon-
trivialcareprocessoftheamchospital. wefocussed
on obtaining insights into the careﬂow by looking at
thecontrol-ﬂow,organizationalandperformanceper-
spective. for these three perspectives, we presented
some initial results. we have shown that it is pos-
sible to mine complex hospital processes giving in-
sightsintotheprocess. inaddition,withexistingtech-
niqueswewereabletoderive understandable models
for large groups of patients. this was also conﬁrmed
by people ofthe amchospital.
furthermore, we compared our results with a
ﬂowchart for the diagnostic trajectory of the gynae-
cological oncology healthcare process, and where a
top-down approach had been used for creating the
ﬂowchart and obtaining the logistical data (elhuizen
et al., 2007). with regard to the ﬂowchart, compa-
rable results have been obtained. however, a lot of
effort was needed for creating the ﬂowchart and ob-
tainingthelogisticaldata,wherewithprocessmining
thereistheopportunitytoobtainthesekindofdatain
asemi-automatic way.
unfortunately, traditional process mining ap-
proaches have problems dealing with unstructured
processes as, for example, can be found in a hospital
environment. future work will focus on both devel-
opingnewmining techniques and on using existing
techniquesinaninnovativewaytoobtainunderstand-
able, high-level information instead of “spaghetti-
like” models showing all details. obviously, we plan
to evaluate these results in healthcare organizations
such as theamc.
acknowledgements
this research is supported by eit, nwo-ew, the
technologyfoundationstw,andthesuperproject(fp6). moreover, we would like to thank the many
people involved inthedevelopment of prom.
references
anyanwu,k.,sheth,a.,cardoso,j.,miller,j.,andkochut,
k. (2003). healthcare enterprise process develop-
ment and integration. journal of research and prac-
ticeininformation technology , 35(2):83–98.
dumas, m., van der aalst, w., and ter hofstede, a. (2005).
process-awareinformationsystems: bridgingpeople
and software through process technology . wiley &
sons.
elhuizen, s., burger, m., jonkers, r., limburg, m.,
klazinga, n., and bakker, p. (2007). using busi-
ness process redesign to reduce wait times at a
university hospital in the netherlands. the joint
commission journal on quality and patient safety ,
33(6):332–341.
lenz, r., elstner, t., siegele, h., and kuhn, k. (2002). a
practical approach to process support in health in-
formation systems. journal of the american medical
informaticsassociation ,9(6):571–585.
vanderaalst,w.,reijers,h.,andsong,m.(2005).discov-
ering social networks from event logs. computer
supportedcooperative work ,14(6):549–593.
van der aalst, w., reijers, h., weijters, a., van dongen,
b., de medeiros, a. a., song, m., and verbeek, h.
(2007a). business process mining : an industrial ap-
plication. informationsystems , 32(5).
van der aalst, w., van dongen, b., g ¨unther, c., mans, r.,
de medeiros, a. a., rozinat, a., rubin, v., song,
m., verbeek, h., and weijters, a. (2007b). prom
4.0: comprehensive support for real process analy-
sis. inkleijn,j.andyakovlev,a.,editors, application
and theory of petri nets and other models of con-
currency (icatpn 2007) , volume 4546 of lecture
notesincomputerscience ,pages484–494.springer-
verlag, berlin.
van der aalst, w., van dongen, b., herbst, j., maruster,
l., schimm, g., and weijters, a. (2003). workﬂow
mining: a survey of issues and approaches. data
andknowledgeengineering , 47(2).
van der aalst, w., weijters, a., and maruster, l. (2004).
workﬂow mining: discovering process models from
event logs. ieee transactions on knowledge and
dataengineering , 16(9):1128–1142.
van dongen, b., busi, n., pinnaand, g., and van der aalst,
w. (2007). an iterative algorithm for applying the
theory of regions in process mining. beta work-
ing paper series, wp 195, eindhoven university of
technology, eindhoven.
weijters, a. and van der aalst, w. (2003). rediscovering
workﬂow models from event-based data using lit-
tle thumb. integrated computer-aided engineering ,
10(2):151–162.