application of process mining in healthcare – a case
study in a dutch hospital
r.s. mans1, m.h. schonenberg1, m. song1, w.m.p. van der aalst1,
and p.j.m. bakker2
1department of information systems eindhoven university of technology, p.o. box 513
nl-5600 mb, eindhoven, the netherlands
{r.s.mans,m.h.schonenberg,m.s.song,w.m.p.v.d.aalst }@tue.nl
2academic medical center, university of amsterdam, department of innovation and process
management, amsterdam, the netherlands
p.j.bakker@amc.uva.nl
abstract. to gain competitive advantage, hospitals try to streamline their pro-
cesses. in order to do so, it is essential to have an accurate view of the “careﬂows”
under consideration. in this paper, we apply process mining techniques to obtain
meaningful knowledge about these ﬂows, e.g., to discover typical paths followedby particular groups of patients. this is a non-trivial task given the dynamic na-
ture of healthcare processes. the paper demonstrates the applicability of process
mining using a real case of a gynecological oncology process in a dutch hos-pital. using a variety of process mining techniques, we analyzed the healthcare
process from three different perspectives : (1) the control ﬂow perspective, (2) the
organizational perspective and (3) the performance perspective. in order to do sowe extracted relevant event logs from the hospitals information system and ana-
lyzed these logs using the prom framework. the results show that process mining
can be used to provide new insights that facilitate the improvement of existingcareﬂows.
1 introduction
in a competitive health-care market, hospitals have to focus on ways to streamline their
processes in order to deliver high quality care while at the same time reducing costs[1]. furthermore, also on the governmental side and on the side of the health insurance
companies, more and more pressure is put on hospitals to work in the most efﬁcient
way as possible, whereas in the future, an in crease in the demand for care is expected.
a complicating factor is that hea lthcare is characterized by highly complex and ex-
tremely ﬂexible patient care processes, also referred to as “careﬂows”. moreover, many
disciplines are involved for which it is found that they are working in isolation and
hardly have any idea about what happens within other disciplines. another issue is that
within healthcare many autonomous, independently developed applications are found[5]. a consequence of this all is that it is not known what happens in a healthcare
process for a group of patients with the same diagnosis .
the concept of process mining provides an interesting opportunity for providing a
solution to this problem. process mining [9] aims at extracting process knowledge from
a. fred, j. filipe, and h. gamboa (eds.): biostec 2008, ccis 25, pp. 425–438, 2008.
c/circlecopyrtspringer-verlag berlin heidelberg 2008426 r.s. mans et al.
so-called “event logs” which may originate from all kinds of systems, like enterprise
information systems or hospital information systems. typically, these event logs containinformation about the start/completion of process steps together with related context
data (e.g. actors and resources). furthermore, process mining is a very broad area both
in terms of (1) applications (from banks to embedded systems) and (2) techniques.
this paper focusses on the applicability of process mining in the healthcare domain.
process mining has already been successfully applied in the service industry [7]. in this
paper, we demonstrate the applicability of process mining to the healthcare domain. we
will show how process mining can be used fo r obtaining insights r elated to careﬂows,
e.g., the identiﬁcation of care paths and (strong) collaboration between departments. tothis end, in section 3, we will use several mining techniques which will also show the
diversity of process mining techniques available, like control ﬂow discovery but also
the discovery of organizational aspects.
in this paper, we present a case study where we use raw data of the amc hospital in
amsterdam, a large academic hospital in the netherlands. this raw data contains data
about a group of 627 gynecological oncology patients treated in 2005 and 2006 and forwhich all diagnostic and treatment activities h ave been recorded for ﬁnancial purposes.
note that we did not use any a-priori knowledge about the care process of this group of
patients and that we also did not have any process model at hand.
today’s business intelligence (bi) tool s used in the healthcare domain, like cognos,
business objects, or sap bi, typically l ook at aggregate data seen from an external
perspective (frequencies, averages, utilizati on, service levels, etc.). these bi tools fo-
cus on performance indicators such as the number of knee operations, the length of
waiting lists, and the success rate of surgery . process mining looks “inside the process”
at different abstraction levels. so, in the context of a hospital, unlike bi tools, we are
more concerned with the care paths followed by individual patients and whether certain
procedures are followed or not.
this paper is structured as follows: section 2 provides an overview of process min-
ing. in section 3 we will show the applicability of process mining in the healthcaredomain using data obtained for a group of 627 gynecological oncology patients. sec-
tion 4 concludes the paper.
2 process mining
process mining is applicable to a wide range of systems. these systems may be pure
information systems (e.g., erp systems) or systems where the hardware plays a moreprominent role (e.g., embedded systems). the only requirement is that the system pro-
duces event logs , thus recording (parts of) the actual behavior.
an interesting class of information systems that produce event logs are the so-called
process-aware information systems (paiss) [2]. examples are classical workﬂow man-
agement systems (e.g. staffware), erp systems (e.g. sap), case handling systems (e.g.flower), pdm systems (e.g. windchill), crm systems (e.g. microsoft dynamics
crm), middleware (e.g., ibm’s websphere), hospital information systems (e.g., chip-
soft), etc. these systems provide very detailed information about the activities that havebeen executed.application of process mining in healthcare 427
models
analyzesrecords
events, e.g., 
messages,
transactions,
etc.specifies
configures
implements
analyzessupports/
controls
people machines
organizationscomponentsbusiness processes
fig. 1. three types of process mining: (1) discovery, (2) conformance, and (3) extension
however, not only paiss are recording events. also, in a typical hospital there is a wide
variety of systems that record events. for ex ample, in an intensive care unit, a system
can record which examinations or treatments a patient undergoes and also it can recordoccurring complications for a patient. for a radiology department the whole process of
admittance of a patient till the archival of t he photograph can be recorded. however,
frequently these systems are limited to one department only. however, systems used forbilling purposes have to ensure that all services delivered to the patient will be paid.
in order for these systems to work properly, information from different systems needs
to be collected so that it is clear which activities have been performed in the care pro-cess of a patient. in this way, these systems within the hospital can contain information
about processes within one department but also across departments. this information
can be used for improving processes within departments itself or improving the services
offered to patients.
the goal of process mining is to extract in formation (e.g., process models) from
these logs, i.e., process m ining describes a family of a-posteriori analysis techniques
exploiting the information recorded in the event logs. typically, these approaches as-
sume that it is possible to sequentially reco rd events such that each event refers to an
activity (i.e., a well-deﬁned step in the proce ss) and is related to a particular case (i.e.,
a process instance). furthermore, some mining techniques use additional information
such as the performer or originator of the event (i.e., the person/resource executing or
initiating the activity), the timestamp of the event, or data elements recorded with the
event (e.g., the size of an order).
process mining addresses the problem that most “process/system owners” have lim-
ited information about what is actually happening. in practice, there is often a signiﬁ-
cant gap between what is prescribed or supposed to happen, and what actually happens.
only a concise assessment of reality, which process mining strives to deliver, can help in
verifying process models, and ultimately be used in system or process redesign efforts.
the idea of process mining is to discover, monitor and improve real processes (i.e., not
assumed processes) by extracting knowledge from event logs. we consider three basic
types of process mining (figure 1): (1) discovery ,( 2 ) conformance ,a n d( 3 ) extension .428 r.s. mans et al.
discovery. traditionally, process min ing has been focusing on discovery , i.e., deriving
information about the original process model, the organizational context, and executionproperties from enactment logs. an example of a technique addressing the control ﬂow
perspective is the α-algorithm [10], which constructs a petri net model describing the
behavior observed in the event log. it is important to mention that there is no a-priorimodel, i.e., based on an event log some model is constructed. however, process mining
is not limited to process models (i.e., contro l ﬂow) and recent process mining techniques
are more and more focusing on other perspectiv es, e.g., the organizational perspective,
performance perspective or the data perspective. for example, there are approaches to
extract social networks from event logs and a nalyze them using social network analy-
sis [6]. this allows organizations to monitor how people, groups, or software/system
components are working together. also, there are approaches to visualize performance
related information, e.g. there are approaches which graphically shows the bottlenecksand all kinds of performance indicators, e.g., average/variance of the total ﬂow time or
the time spent between two activities.
conformance. there is an a-priori model. this model is used to check if reality con-
forms to the model. for example, there may be a process model indicating that purchase
orders of more than one million euro require two checks. another example is the check-ing of the so-called “four-eyes” principle. conformance checking may be used to detect
deviations, to locate and explain these deviations, and to measure the severity of these
deviations.
extension. there is an a-priori model. this model is extended with a new aspect or
perspective, i.e., the goal is not to check conformance but to enrich the model with thedata in the event log. an example is the extension of a process model with performance
data, i.e., some a-priori process model is used on which bottlenecks are projected.
at this point in time there are mature tools such as the prom framework [8], featuring
an extensive set of analysis techniques which can be applied to real-life logs while
supporting the whole spectrum depicted in figure 1.
3 healthcare process
in this section, we want to show the applicability of process mining in healthcare. how-
ever, as healthcare processes are characterized by the fact that several organizational
units can be involved in the treatment process of p atients and that these organizational
units often have their own speciﬁc it applications, it becomes clear that getting data,which is related to healthcare processes, is not an easy task. in spite of this, systems
used in hospitals need to provide an integrated view on all these it applications as it
needs to be guaranteed that the hospital get s paid for every service delivered to a pa-
tient. consequently, these kind of systems contain process-related information about
healthcare processes and are therefore an interesting candidate for providing the dataneeded for process mining.
to this end, as case study for showing the applicability of process mining in health
care, we use raw data collected by the billing system of the amc hospital. this raw datacontains information about a group of 627 gynecological oncology patients treated inapplication of process mining in healthcare 429
2005 and 2006 and for which all diagnostic and t reatment activities have been recorded.
the process for gynecological oncology patients is supported by several different de-partments, e.g. gynecology, radiology and several labs.
for this data set, we have extracted ev ent logs from the amc’s databases where
each event refers to a service delivered to a patient. as the data is coming from a billingsystem, we have to face the interesting pr oblem that for each service delivered for a
patient it is only known on which daythe service has been delivered. in other words,
we do not have any information about the actual timestamps of the start and completion
of the service delivered. consequently, t he ordering of events which happen on the
same day do not necessarily conform with the order in which events of that day wereexecuted.
nevertheless, as the log contains realdata about the services delivered to gynecolog-
ical oncology patients it is still an interesting and representative data set for showing theapplicability of process mining in healthcare as still many techniques can be applied.
note that the log contains 376 different eve nt names which indicates that we are dealing
with a non-trivial careﬂow process.
in the remainder of this section we will focus on obtaining, in an explorative way,
insights into the gynecological oncology healthcare process . so, we will only focus on
thediscovery part of process mining, instead of the conformance andextension part.
furthermore, obtaining these insights should not be limited to one perspective only.
therefore, in section 3.2, we focus on the discovery of care paths followed by patients ,
the discovery of organizational aspects and the discovery of performance related infor-
mation , respectively. this also demonstrates th e diversity of process mining techniques
available. however, as will be discussed in section 3.1, we ﬁrst need to perform somepreprocessing before being able to present information on the right level of detail.
3.1 preprocessing of logs
the log of the amc hospital contains a huge amount of distinct activities, of which
many are rather low level activities, i.e., events at a low abstraction level. for example,
for our purpose, the logged lab activities are at a too low abstraction level, e.g. deter-mination of chloride, lactic acid and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr). we would
like to consider all these low level lab tests as a single lab test. mining a log that con-
tains many distinct activities would result in a too detailed spaghetti-like model, that isdifﬁcult to understand. hence, we ﬁrst apply some preprocessing on the logs to obtain
interpretable results during mining. during preprocessing we want to “simplify” the log
by removing the excess of low level activities. in addition, our goal is to consider onlyevents at the department level. in this way, w e can, for example, focus on care paths and
interactions between departments. we applied two different approaches to do this.
our ﬁrst approach is to detect a representative for the lower level activities. in our
logs, this approach can be applied to the before mentioned lab activities. in the logs
we can ﬁnd an activity that can serve as representative for the lab activities, namelythe activity that is always executed when sam ples are offered to the lab. all other (low
level) lab activities in the log are simply discarded.
the log also contains groups of low level act ivities for which there is no represen-
tative. for instance at the radiology department many activities can occur (e.g., echo430 r.s. mans et al.
fig. 2. derived process model for all cases
abdomen, thorax and ct brain), but the logs do not contain a single event that occurs for
every visit to this department, like a registration event for example. we apply aggrega-
tionfor low level activities in groups without a rep resentative by (1) deﬁning a represen-
tative, (2) mapping all activities from the group to this representative and (3) removingrepetitions of events from the log. for example, for the radiology department we de-
ﬁne “radiology” as representative. a log that originally contains “ ...,ultrasound
scan abdomen, chest x-ray, ct scan brain,... ”, would contain
“...,radiology,... ”, after mapping low level radiology activities to this rep-
resentative and removing any duplicates.
3.2 mining
in this section, we present some results obtained through a detailed analysis of the
amc’s event log for the gynecological oncology process. we concentrate on the dis-
covery part to show actual situations (e.g. c ontrol ﬂows, organizational interactions)
in the healthcare process. more speciﬁcally, we elaborate on mining results based onthree major perspectives (i.e. control ﬂow, org anizational, performance perspectives) in
process mining.
control flow perspective. one of the most promising mining techniques is control
ﬂow mining which automatically derives process models from process logs. the gen-
erated process model reﬂects the actual process as observed through real process exe-
cutions. if we generate process models from healthcare process logs, they give insight
into care paths for patients. until now, there are several process mining algorithms such
as the α-mining algorithm, heuristic mining algorithm, region mining algorithm, etc
[10,12,11]. in this paper, we use the heuristic mining algorithm, since it can deal with
noise and exceptions, and enables users to focus on the main process ﬂow instead of
on every detail of the behavior appearing in the process log [12]. figure 2 shows theprocess model for all cases obtained using the heuristics miner. despite its ability toapplication of process mining in healthcare 431
fig. 3. log clustering result
focus on the most frequent paths, the process, depicted in figure 2, is still spaghetti-like
and too complex to understand easily.
since processes in the healthcare domain do not have a single kind of ﬂow but a lot
of variants based on patients and diseases, it is not surprising that the derived processmodel is spaghetti-like and convoluted.
one of the methods for handling this problem is breaking down a log into two or
more sub-logs until these become simple enough to be analyzed clearly. we apply clus-tering techniques to divide a process log into several groups (i.e. clusters), where the
cases in the same cluster have similar properties. clustering is a very useful technique
for logs which contain many cases following di fferent procedures, as is the usual case
in healthcare systems. depending on the interest (e.g., exceptional or frequent pro-
cedures), a cluster can be selected. there ar e several clustering techniques available.
among these, we use the som (self organizing map) algorithm to cluster the log be-
cause of its performance (i.e., speed). figure 3 shows the clustering result obtained by
applying the trace clustering plug-in. nine clusters are obtained from the log. in theﬁgure, the instances in the same cell belong to the same cluster. the ﬁgure also shows
a contour map based on the number of instances in each cell. it is very useful to take
a quick glance at the clusters – are there clusters with many similarities (high land), orare there many clusters with exceptional cases (sea).
by using this approach, we obtained several clusters of reasonable size. in this paper
we show only the result for the biggest cluster, containing 352 cases all with similar
properties. figure 4 shows the heuristic net derived from the biggest cluster. the result
is much simpler than the model in figure 2. furthermore, the ﬁtness of this model is“good”. the model represents the procedure for most cases in the cluster, i.e., these
cases “ﬁt” in the generated process model. a c loser inspection of this main cluster by
domain experts conﬁrmed that this is indeed main stream followed by most gynecolog-ical oncology patients.432 r.s. mans et al.
fig. 4. process model from the biggest cluster
when discussing the result with the people involved in the process, it was noted that pa-
tients, referred to the amc by another hospita l, only visit the outpatient clinic once or
twice. these patients are already diagnosed, and afterwards they are referred to another
department, like radiotherapy, for treatment and which is then responsible for the treat-ment process. also, very ill patients are immediately referred to another department for
treatment after their ﬁrst visit.
another approach for dealing with unstructured processes is the fuzzy miner. the
fuzzy miner [4] addresses the issue of mining unstructured processes by using a mix-
ture of abstraction and clustering techniques and attempts to make a representation
of the (unstructured) process that is unders tandable for analysts. the miner provides
a high-level view on the process by abstr action from undesired details, limiting the
amount of information by aggregation of interesting details and emphasizing the mostimportant details. the fuzzy miner provides an interface where these settings can be
easily conﬁgured and the resulting model can directly be observed (see figure 5a).
in addition, the fuzzy miner offers a dynamic view of the process by replaying
the log in the model. the animation shows cases ﬂowing through the model (depicted
as white dots in figure 5b). in the animation, frequently taken paths are highlighted,
which prevents them from being overlooked. if necessary, clusters from the model can
be analyzed in more detail before , or after animation (figure 5c).
organizational perspective. there are several process mining techniques that address
the organizational perspective, e.g., organi zational mining, social network mining, min-
ing staff assignment rules, etc. [6]. in this paper, we elaborate on social network mining
to provide insights into the collaboration between departments in the hospital. the so-cial network miner allows for the discover y of social networks from process logs. since
there are several social network analysis t echniques and research results available, the
generated social network allows for analysis of social relations between originators in-volving process executions. figure 6 shows the derived social network. to derive theapplication of process mining in healthcare 433
	


		
	
			
	
	
fig. 5. fuzzy miner
network, we used the handover of work metric [6] that measures the frequency of
transfers of work among departments.
the network shows the relationships between originators above a certain thresh-
old. originators, for which all relationships are below the speciﬁc threshold, appear
as isolated circles. the originators that were highly involved in the process appear as
larger dots in the ﬁgure. these results are u seful to detect whether there are frequent
interactions between originators (departments, in our case). in hospitals there are many434 r.s. mans et al.
fig. 6. social network (handover of work metrics)
departments that interact and hand over w ork to each other. the mining result shows
that the general clini cal chemical lab is highly involved in the process and interacts with
many departments. the outpatient clinic (oc) for gynecology and obstetrics is also of-
ten involved, but is not directly connected to all other departments. for instance there
is no relationship (within this threshold) between this oc and the vascular lab. thismeans that there is no, or not much, interaction between these two departments.
when this result was presented to the people involved in the process, they conﬁrmed
the strong collaboration with the departments shown in figure 6. however, they weresurprised about the rather strong collaboration with the dietics department. neverthe-
less, this can be explained by the fact that, when a patient has to go to several chemother-
apy sessions, then a visit to the dietician is also often needed.
moreover, they also noted that the many int eractions between the lab and other de-
partments is misleading as all the examinations are requested by gynecological on-cology and not by the lab. this can be explained by the many lab tests and resulting
interactions between the lab and other departments.
performance perspective. process mining provides sever al performance analysis tech-
niques. among these, the dotted chart is a method suitable for case handling processes
which are ﬂexible and knowledge intensive business processes and focus not on the
routing of work or the activities but on the case (e.g. careﬂows). in this paper, we
use the dotted chart to show overall events and performance information of the log.figure 7 shows the dotted chart. in the chart, events are displayed as dots, and the time
is measured along the horizontal axis of the c hart. the vertical axis represents case ids
and events are colored according to their ta sk ids. it supports several time options such
as actual, relative, logical, etc. in the diag ram, we use relative time which shows theapplication of process mining in healthcare 435
fig. 7. dotted chart
duration from the beginning of an instance to a certain event. thus it indicates the case
duration of each instance. it also provides performance metrics such as the time of the
ﬁrst and of the last events, case durations, the number of events in an instance, etc. forexample, in the ﬁgure (top right, average spread in seconds), the average case duration
is about 49 days.
users can obtain useful insights from the chart, e.g., it is easy to ﬁnd interesting
patterns by looking at the dotted chart. in figure 7, the density of events on the left
side of the diagram is higher than the density of those on the right side. this shows
that initially patients have more diagnosis and t reatment events than in the later parts
of the process. when we focus on the long duration instances (i.e. the instances having
events in the right side of the diagram), it can be observed that they mainly consist ofregular consultation (red dot), consultation by phone (red dot), and lab test (violet dot)
activities. it reﬂects the situation that patients have regular consultation by visiting or
being phoned by the hospital and sometimes have a test after or before the consultation.it is also easy to discover patterns in the occurrences of activities. for example, seven
instances have the pattern that consists of a lab test and an admittance to the nursing
ward activities.
when the results were presented to the people involved in the process, they conﬁrmed
the patterns that we found. furthermore, for the last pattern they indicated that thepattern deals about patients who get a chemotherapy regularly. the day before, they
come for a lab test and when the result is good, they get the next chemotherapy.
where the dotted chart focusses on visualizing the performance information using
dots, the basic performance analysis plug-in aims at calculation of performance values
from a log and presenting this is in several wa ys. it allows users to draw several charts
such as bar chart, pie chart, box-and-whisker chart, meter chart, etc. with performance
information.436 r.s. mans et al.
fig. 8. basic performance analysis plug-in (meter chart)
figure 8 shows one of the results that can be obtained with the plug-in. it depicts a
meter chart for the average sojourn times of the tasks (i.e. the time between the preced-
ing task and a certain task (the time between two dots in the dotted chart analysis)). a
meter chart provides two kinds of information. they are the average sojourn time fora task and the relative position of this val ue amongst the average sojourn times for all
tasks.
to draw the meter chart, the minimum (i.e. 0) and the maximum (i.e. 7.625 days)
value among all the average sojourn times are used. the green part ranges from 0 to
60% of the maximum value, the yellow part covers 60% till 80%, and the red part startsfrom 80% of the maximum value. the needle in each chart shows the average sojourn
time of the task. for example, in the endoscopy chart, the average sojourn time is 7.625
days. as the needle is located in the red part, the users can easily recognize that thistask is one of the tasks which have a long duration.
4 conclusions
in this paper, we have focussed on the applicability of process mining in the healthcaredomain. for our case study, we have used data coming from a non-trivial care process ofthe amc hospital. we focussed on obtaining insights into the careﬂow by looking at the
control-ﬂow, organizational and performance perspective. for these three perspectives,
we presented some initial results. we have shown that it is possible to mine complexhospital processes giving insights into the process. in addition, with existing techniquesapplication of process mining in healthcare 437
we were able to derive understandable models for large groups of patients. this was
also conﬁrmed by people of the amc hospital.
furthermore, we compared our results with a ﬂowchart for the diagnostic trajectory
of the gynaecological oncology healthcare pro cess, and where a top-down approach had
been used for creating the ﬂowchart and obtaining the logistical data [3]. with regardto the ﬂowchart, comparable results have b een obtained. however, a lot of effort was
needed for creating the ﬂowchart and obtaining the logistical data, where with process
mining there is the opportunity to obtain these kind of data in a semi-automatic way.
unfortunately, traditional process mining approaches have problems dealing with
unstructured processes as, for example, can be found in a hospital environment. futurework will focus on both developing newmining techniques and on using existing tech-
niques in an innovative way to obtain understandable, high-level information instead of
“spaghetti-like” models showing all details. obviously, we plan to evaluate these resultsin healthcare organizations such as the amc.
acknowledgements. this research is supported by eit, nwo-ew, the technology
foundation stw, and the super project (fp6). moreover, we would like to thank the
many people involved in the development of prom.
references
1. anyanwu, k., sheth, a., cardoso, j., miller, j., kochut, k.: healthcare enterprise process
development and integration. journal of research and practice in information technol-ogy 35(2), 83–98 (2003)
2. dumas, m., van der aalst, w.m.p., ter hofstede, a.h.m.: process-aware information sys-
tems: bridging people and software through process technology. wiley & sons, chichester
(2005)
3. elhuizen, s.g., burger, m.p.m., jonkers, r.e., limburg, m., klazinga, n., bakker, p.j.m.:
using business process redesign to reduce wait times at a university hospital in the
netherlands. the joint commission journa l on quality and patie nt safety 33(6), 332–341
(2007)
4. g¨ unther, c.w., van der aalst, w.m.p.: finding structure in unstructured processes: the case
for process mining. technical report
5. lenz, r., elstner, t., siegele, h., kuhn, k.: a practical approach to process support in
health information systems. journal of the am erican medical informatics association 9(6),
571–585 (2002)
6. van der aalst, w.m.p., reijers, h.a., song, m.: discovering social networks from event
logs. computer supported cooperative work 14(6), 549–593 (2005)
7. van der aalst, w.m.p., reijers, h.a., weijters, a.j.m.m., van dongen, b.f., alves de
medeiros, a.k., song, m., verbeek, h.m.w.: business process mining: an industrial ap-
plication. information systems 32(5), 713–732 (2007)
8. van der aalst, w.m.p., van dongen, b.f., g¨ unther, c.w., mans, r.s., alves de medeiros,
a.k., rozinat, a., rubin, v ., song, m., verbeek, h.m.w., weijters, a.j.m.m.: prom
4.0: comprehensive support for real process analysis. in: kleijn, j., yakovlev, a. (eds.)
icatpn 2007. lncs, vol. 4546, pp. 484–494. springer, heidelberg (2007)
9. van der aalst, w.m.p., van dongen, b.f., herbst, j., maruster, l., schimm, g., weijters,
a.j.m.m.: workﬂow mining: a survey of issues and approaches. data and knowledge en-
gineering 47(2), 237–267 (2003)438 r.s. mans et al.
10. van der aalst, w.m.p., weijters, a.j.m.m., maruster, l.: workﬂow mining: discovering
process models from event logs. ieee transactions on knowledge and data engineer-
ing 16(9), 1128–1142 (2004)
11. van dongen, b.f., busi, n., pinnaand, g.m., van der aalst, w.m.p.: an iterative algorithm
for applying the theory of regions in process mining. beta working paper series, wp
195, eindhoven university of technology, eindhoven (2007)
12. weijters, a.j.m.m., van der aalst, w.m.p.: rediscovering workﬂow models from event-
based data using little thumb. integrated computer-aided engi neering 10(2), 151–162
(2003)