 1
wil m. p . van der aalst
process mining
discovery, conformance and enhancement of business processes
process 
miningwil m. p . van der aalst
computer scienceprocess mining
discovery, conformance and 
enhancement of business processesmore and more information about business processes is recorded by information 
systems in the form of so-called “event logs” . despite the omnipresence of such data, most organizations diagnose problems based on fiction rather than facts. process mining is an emerging discipline based on process model-driven approaches and data mining. /uni00a0it not only allows organizations to fully beneﬁ  t from the information stored in their systems, but it can also be used to check the conformance of processes, detect bottlenecks, and predict execution problems.
wil van der aalst delivers the ﬁ  rst book on process mining. it aims to be self-contained 
while covering the entire process mining spectrum from process discovery to opera-tional support. in part i, the author provides the basics of business process modeling and data mining necessary to understand the remainder of the book. part ii focuses on process discovery as the most important process mining task. part iii moves beyond discovering the control ﬂ  ow of processes and highlights conformance checking, and organizational and time perspectives. part iv guides the reader in successfully applying process mining in practice, including an introduction to the widely used open-source tool prom. finally, part v takes a step back, reﬂ  ecting on the material presented and the key open challenges.
overall, this book provides a comprehensive overview of the state of the art in process 
mining. it/uni00a0is intended for business process analysts, business consultants, process managers, graduate students, and bpm researchers.
features and beneﬁ  ts:
 •first book on process mining, bridging the gap between business process modeling and business intelligence.
 •written by one of the most inﬂ  uential and most-cited computer scientists and the best-known bpm researcher.
 •self-contained and comprehensive overview for a broad audience in academia and industry.
 •/t_h  e reader can put process mining into practice immediately due to the applicability of the techniques and the availability of the open-source process mining so/f_t  ware prom.
9780857293404isbn 978-3-642-19344-6van der aalst