when process mining meets bioinformatics
r.p. jagadeesh chandra bose1;2and wil m.p. van der aalst1
1department of mathematics and computer science, university of technology,
eindhoven, the netherlands
2philips healthcare, veenpluis 5{6, best, the netherlands
fj.c.b.rantham.prabhakara,w.m.p.v.d.aalst g@tue.nl
abstract. process mining techniques can be used to extract non-trivial
process related knowledge and thus generate interesting insights from
event logs. similarly, bioinformatics aims at increasing the understand-
ing of biological processes through the analysis of information associated
with biological molecules. techniques developed in both disciplines can
benet from one another, e.g., sequence analysis is a fundamental as-
pect in both process mining and bioinformatics. in this paper, we draw
a parallel between bioinformatics and process mining. in particular, we
present some initial success stories that demonstrate that the emerg-
ing process mining discipline can benet from techniques developed for
bioinformatics.
keywords: sequence, trace, execution patterns, diagnostics, conformance,
alignment, conguration
1 introduction
bioinformatics aims at increasing the understanding of biological processes and
entails the application of computational techniques to understand and organize
the information associated with biological macromolecules [1]. sequence analysis
or sequence informatics is a core aspect of bioinformatics that is concerned with
the analysis of dna/protein sequences3and has been an active area of research
for over four decades.
process mining is a relatively young research discipline aimed at discovering,
monitoring and improving real processes by extracting knowledge from event
logs readily available in today's information systems [2]. business processes leave
trails in a variety of data sources (e.g., audit trails, databases, transaction logs).
hence, every process instance can be described by a trace, i.e., a sequence of
events. process mining techniques are able to extract knowledge from such traces
and provide a welcome extension to the repertoire of business process analysis
techniques. the topics in process mining can be broadly classied into three
3dna stores information in the form of the base nucleotide sequence, which is a string
of four letters (a, t, g and c) while protein sequences are sequences dened over
twenty amino acids and are the fundamental determinants of biological structure
and function.148 pre-proceedings of caise'11 forum
categories (i) discovery , (ii) conformance , and (iii) enhancement . process dis-
covery deals with the discovery of models from event logs. for example, there
are dozens of techniques that automatically construct process models (e.g., petri
nets or bpmn models) from event logs [2]. discovery is not restricted to control-
ow; one may also discover organizational models, etc. conformance deals with
comparing an apriori model with the observed behavior as recorded in the log
and aims at detecting inconsistencies/deviations between a process model and
its corresponding execution log. in other words, it checks for any violation be-
tween what was expected to happen and what actually happened . enhancement
deals with extending or improving an existing model based on information about
the process execution in an event log. for example, annotating a process model
with performance data to show bottlenecks, throughput times etc. some of the
challenges in process mining include the discovery of process maps (navigable
hierarchical process models) and the provision of process diagnostics support for
auditors and analysts [3].
it is important to note that, to a large extent, sequence analysis is a funda-
mental aspect in almost all facets of process mining and bioinformatics. in spite
of all the peculiarities specic to business processes and process mining, the rel-
atively young eld of process mining should, in our view, take account of the
conceptual foundations, practical experiences, and analysis tools developed by
sequence informatics researchers over the last couple of decades. in this paper, we
describe some of the analogies between problems studied in both disciplines. we
present some initial successes which demonstrate that process mining techniques
can benet from such a cross-fertilization.
2 notations
we use the following notations in this paper.
{letdenote the set of activities. +is the set of all non-empty nite
sequences of activities from .
{a trace corresponds to a process instance expressed as a nite sequence of
activities.t2+is a trace over .jtjdenotes the length of the trace t.
{the ordered sequence of activities in tis denoted as t(1)t(2)t(3):::t(n)
wheret(k) represents the kthactivity in the trace.
{an event log,l, corresponds to a multi-set (or bag) of traces from +.
3 from sequence to structure
a dna sequence motif is dened as a nucleic acid sequence pattern that has
some biological signicance (both structural and functional) [4]. these motifs
are usually found to recur in dierent genes or within a single gene. for example,
tandem repeats (tandemly repeating dna) are associated with various regulatory
mechanisms such as protein binding [5]. more often than not, sequence motifswhen process mining meets bioinformatics 149
are also associated with structural motifs found in proteins thus establishing a
strong correspondence between sequence and structure.
likewise, common subsequences of activities in an event log that are found
to recur within a process instance or across process instances have some domain
(functional) signicance. in [6], we adopted the sequence patterns (e.g., tandem
repeats, maximal repeats etc.) proposed in the bioinformatics literature, corre-
lated them to commonly used process model constructs (e.g., tandem repeats
and tandem arrays correspond to simple loop constructs) and proposed a means
to form abstractions over these patterns. using these abstractions as a basis, we
proposed a two-phase approach to process discovery [7]. the rst phase comprises
of pre-processing the event log with abstractions at a desired level of granular-
ity and the second phase deals with discovering the process maps with seamless
zoom-in/out facility. figure 1 summarizes the overall approach.
event logspattern
tracecommon
execution
patternsrelationships
between
patternsmicro
structuresmacro
structure
fig. 1. repeating subsequences of activities dene the common execution patterns
and carry some domain (functional) signicance. related patterns and activities per-
taining to these patterns dene abstractions that correspond to micro-structures (or
sub-processes). the top-level process model can be viewed as a macro-structure that
subsumes the micro-structures.
figure 2 highlights the dierence between the traditional approach to pro-
cess discovery and the two-phase approach. note that the process model (map)
discovered using the two-phase approach is simpler. our approach supports the
abstraction of activities based on their context and type, and provides a seamless
zoom-in and zoom-out functionality.
thus the bringing together of concepts in bioinformatics to process mining
has enabled the discovery of hierarchical process models and opened a new per-
spective in dealing with ne granular event logs.150 pre-proceedings of caise'11 forum
event log
s a m b c u d n j e
s a m q f h l l h g i k e
s a m f g h l h i k q e
s a m b c d n u j e
s a m f h l g i h l h k q e
s a m q f g i h l h k e
s a m q f g h l h i k e
s a m p c u d n r e
s a m b d n c u j e
s a m p d n c u r etraditional
approach
two-phase
approach
abstractions dened over
common execution patternstransformed
log
x b z j e
x q y y e
x y y q e
x b z z j e
x y y y q e
x q y y y e
x q y y y e
x p z r e
x b z j e
x p z r e
fig. 2. traditional approach vs. our two-phase approach to process discovery
4 sequence alignment and process diagnostics
multiple sequence alignment has been a subject of extensive research in compu-
tational biology for over three decades. sequence alignment is an essential tool in
bioinformatics that assists in unraveling the secondary and tertiary structures
of proteins and molecules, their evolution and functions, and in inferring the
taxonomic, phylogenetic or cladistic relationships between organisms, diagnoses
of genetic diseases etc [8, 9].
in [10], we have adapted sequence alignment to traces in an event log and
showed that it carries signicant promise in process diagnostics. the goal of
trace alignment is to align traces in such a way that event logs can be easily
explored. given a set of traces t=ft1;t2;:::;t ng, trace alignment can be
dened as a mapping of tto another set of traces t=ft1;t2;:::;tngwhere
ti2([f g )+for 1in. in addition, the following three properties need
to be satised with respect to tandt: (a) each trace in tis of the same length
i.e., there exists an m2nsuch thatjt1j=jt2j==jtnj=m(b)tiis equal
totiafter removing all gap symbols `  ' and (c) there is no k2f1;:::;mgsuch
that81inti(k) = .
trace alignment can be used to explore the process in the early stages of anal-
ysis and to answer specic questions in later stages of analysis. more specically,
trace alignment can assist in answering questions such as:
{what is the most common (likely) process behavior that is executed?
{where do my process instances deviate and what do they have in common?
{are there any common patterns of execution in my traces?
{what are the contexts in which an activity or a set of activities is executed
in my event log?when process mining meets bioinformatics 151
{what are the process instances that share/capture a desired behavior either
exactly or approximately?
{are there particular patterns (e.g., milestones, concurrent activities etc.) in
my process?
figure 3 depicts the results of trace alignment for a real-life log from a rental
agency. the gure shows that trace alignment can assist in answering a variety
of diagnostic questions. every row corresponds to a process instance and time
increases from left to right. the horizonal position is based on logical time rather
than real timestamps. if two rows have the same activity name in the same
column, then the corresponding two events are very similar and are therefore
aligned. note that the same activity can appear in multiple columns. by reading
a row from left to right, we can see the sequence of activities (i.e., the trace) that
was executed for a process instance. process instances having the same trace can
be grouped into one row to simplify the diagram. the challenge is to nd an
alignment that is as simple and informative as possible. for example, the number
of columns and gaps should be minimized while having as much consensus as
possible per column.
the application of sequence alignment in bioinformatics to process mining
has created an altogether new dimension to conformance checking; deviations
and violations are uncovered by analyzing just the raw event traces (thereby
avoiding the need for process models).
finding good quality alignments is notoriously complex. the initial results of
trace alignment are denitely encouraging. nonetheless, there are various new
challenges when adopting biological sequence alignment to trace alignment in
the context of business processes [11]. for example, biological sequences tend to
be homogenous whereas traces in semi-structured processes (e.g., care processes
in hospitals) tend to be much more variable. other dierences are the fact that
traces in an event log can be of very dierent lengths (e.g., due to loops) and
may be the result of concurrency. these characteristics provide new challenges
for sequence alignment.
5 phylogeny and process conguration
phylogenetics refers to the study of evolutionary relationships, and is one of the
rst applications in bioinformatics. a phylogeny is a tree representation of the
evolutionary history of a set (family) of organisms, gene/protein sequences etc.
the basic premise in phylogenetics is that genes have evolved by duplication
and divergence from common ancestors [12]. the genes can therefore exist in a
nested hierarchy of relatedness.
in the past couple of years, process conguration has gained prominence in
the bpm community [13]. process conguration is primarily concerned with
managing families of business processes that are similar to one another in many
ways yet diering in some other ways. for example, processes within dierent
municipalities are very similar in many aspects and dier in some other aspects.
such discrepancies can arise due to characteristics peculiar to each municipality152 pre-proceedings of caise'11 forum
common execution patterns are
captured in the form of well con-
served regionsconcurrent activities manifest in
mutually exclusive traces across
dierent columns
the consensus sequence represents
the backbone of the processdeviations, exceptional behavior and rare event
executions are captured in regions that are
sparsely lled i.e., regions with lots of gap sym-
bol `-' or in regions that are well conserved with a
few rare gaps.
fig. 3. an example of trace alignment for a real-life log from a rental agency. each
row refers to a process instance. columns describe positions in traces. consider now
the cell in row yand column x. if the cell contains an activity name a, then aoccurred
for case yat position x. if the cell contains no activity name (i.e., a gap \  "), then
nothing happened for yat position x.
(e.g., dierences in size, demographics, problems, and policies) that need to
be maintained. furthermore, operational processes need to change to adapt to
changing circumstances, e.g., new legislation, extreme variations in supply and
demand, seasonal eects, etc. a congurable process model describes a family
of similar process models in a given domain [13], and can be thought of as
the genesis (root) of the family. all variants in the family can be derived from
the congurable model through a series of change patterns [14]. one of the core
research problems in process conguration is to automatically derive congurable
process models from specic models and event logs.
one can nd stark similarity between phylogenetics and process congura-
tion. techniques have been proposed in the bioinformatics literature to discover
phylogenies both from (protein) structure as well as from sequences. this can be
compared to deriving congurable process models from specic models and from
event logs respectively. the adaptability of phylogeny construction techniques
to process conguration needs to be explored.when process mining meets bioinformatics 153
techniques from bioinformatics have also been adopted to trace clustering in
process mining [15, 16]. sequence clustering techniques have been applied to deal
with unlabeled event logs4in process mining [17]. experiences from bioinformat-
ics can also contribute to tooling and infrastructure eorts in process mining.
for example, visualization is one of the challenging problems in process mining
tooling5. a lot of current visualization means in process mining become un-
manageable when dealing with large event logs thereby compromising the com-
prehensibility. visualization is used in many areas within bioinformatics (e.g.,
sequence matching, genome browsing, multiple sequence alignment etc.), with
varying success, and good tools already exist. as another example, to cater to the
rapidly increasing accumulation of biological data, lots of eorts had been ini-
tiated in bioinformatics to create advanced databases with analysis capabilities
devoted to particular categories e.g., genbank (cataloguing dna data), swiss-
prot/trembl (repository of protein sequences) etc. recently, similar eorts
had been initiated in the process modeling and process mining community to
create repositories with advanced support for dealing with process model collec-
tions e.g., apromore [18]. such an overlap between the goals combined with
the promising initial results calls for a more rigorous attempt at understanding
and exploiting the synergy between these two disciplines.
6 conclusions
bioinformatics and process mining share some common goals. in this paper, we
presented the commonalities between the problems and techniques studied in
bioinformatics and process mining. exploiting these commonalities, we demon-
strated that process mining can benet from the plethora of techniques developed
in bioinformatics. initial attempts at such a crossover have enabled the discovery
of hierarchical process models and helped extending the scope of conformance
checking to also cover the direct inspection of traces. although this is just a
rst step towards an interaction between the two disciplines, the results are very
promising and the relationship will be explored further in our future work.
acknowledgments the authors are grateful to philips healthcare for funding
the research in process mining.
references
1. luscombe, n., greenbaum, d., gerstein, m.: what is bioinformatics? a proposed
denition and overview of the field. methods of information in medicine 40(4)
(2001) 346{358
4in an unlabeled event log, the case to which an event belongs to is unknown.
5prom is an extensible framework that provides a comprehensive set of
tools/plugins for the discovery and analysis of process models from event logs. see
http://www.processmining.org for more information and to download prom.154 pre-proceedings of caise'11 forum
2. van der aalst, w.m.p.: process mining: discovery, conformance and enhancement
of business processes. springer (2011)
3. van der aalst, w.m.p.: challenges in business process mining. technical report
bpm-10-01, business process management (bpm) center (2010)
4. das, m.k., dai, h.k.: a survey of dna motif finding algorithms. bmc bioin-
formatics 8(suppl 7) (2007) s21
5. kolpakov, r., bana, g., kucherov, g.: mreps: ecient and flexible detection of
tandem repeats in dna. nucleic acids research 31(13) (2003) 3672{3678
6. bose, r.p.j.c., van der aalst, w.m.p.: abstractions in process mining: a tax-
onomy of patterns. in dayal, u., eder, j., koehler, j., reijers, h., eds.: business
process management. volume 5701 of lncs., springer-verlag (2009) 159{175
7. li, j., bose, r.p.j.c., van der aalst, w.m.p.: mining context-dependent and
interactive business process maps using execution patterns. in zur muehlen, m.,
su, j., eds.: bpm 2010 workshops. volume 66 of lnbip., springer-verlag (2011)
109{121
8. chan, s., wong, a.k.c., chiu, d.: a survey of multiple sequence comparison
methods. bulletin of mathematical biology 54(4) (1992) 563{598
9. gotoh, o.: multiple sequence alignment: algorithms and applications. advanced
biophysics 36(1999) 159{206
10. bose, r.p.j.c., van der aalst, w.m.p.: trace alignment in process mining: oppor-
tunities for process diagnostics. in hull, r., mendling, j., tai, s., eds.: proceedings
of the 8th international conference on business process management (bpm). vol-
ume 6336 of lncs., springer-verlag (2010) 227{242
11. notredame, c.: recent progress in multiple sequence alignment: a survey. phar-
macogenomics 3(2002) 131{144
12. thornton, j.w., desalle, r.: gene family evolution and homology: genomics
meets phylogenetics. annual review of genomics and human genetics 1(1) (2000)
41{73
13. van der aalst, w.m.p., lohmann, n., rosa, m.l., xu, j.: correctness ensuring
process conguration: an approach based on partner synthesis. in hull, r.,
mendling, j., tai, s., eds.: proceedings of the 8th international conference on
business process management (bpm). volume 6336 of lncs., springer-verlag
(2010) 95{111
14. weber, b., rinderle, s., reichert, m.: change patterns and change support
features in process-aware information systems. in: proceedings of the 19th in-
ternational conference on advanced information systems engineering (caise),
springer-verlag (2007) 574{588
15. bose, r.p.j.c., van der aalst, w.m.p.: context aware trace clustering: towards
improving process mining results. in: proceedings of the siam international
conference on data mining (sdm). (2009) 401{412
16. bose, r.p.j.c., van der aalst, w.m.p.: trace clustering based on conserved
patterns: towards achieving better process models. in: business process man-
agement workshops. volume 43 of lnbip., springer (2010) 170{181
17. ferreira, d., zacarias, m., malheiros, m., ferreira, p.: approaching process mining
with sequence clustering: experiments and findings. in: proceedings of the 5th
international conference on business process management (bpm). volume 4714
of lncs., springer (2007) 360{374
18. rosa, m.l., reijers, h.a., van der aalst, w.m.p., dijkman, r.m., mendling, j.,
dumas, m., garcia-banuelos, l.: apromore: an advanced process model
repository. expert systems with applications 38(6) (2011) 7029{7040