process mining for electronic data interchange?
r. engel1, w. krathu1, c. pichler2, w. m. p. van der aalst3, h. werthner1,
and m. zapletal1
1vienna university of technology, austria
institute for software technology and interactive systems
{engel,worarat,werthner,marco}@ec.tuwien.ac.at
2research studios austria
research studio inter-organizational systems
christian.pichler@researchstudio.at
3eindhoven university of technology, the netherlands
department of mathematics & computer science
w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tue.nl
abstract. choreography modeling and service integration received a
lot of attention in the last decade. however, most real-world implemen-
tations of inter-organizational systems are still realized by traditional
electronic data interchange (edi) standards. in traditional edi stan-
dards, the notion of process or choreography is not explicitly specied.
rather, every business document exchange stands for its own. this lack
of process awareness in traditional edi systems hinders organizations
from applying business process management (bpm) methods in such
settings. to address this shortcoming, we seek to derive choreographies
from edi message exchanges. thereby, we employ and extend process
mining techniques, which have so far concentrated on business processes
within single organizations. we discover the interaction sequences be-
tween the partners as well as the business information conveyed in the
exchanged documents, which goes beyond the state-of-the-art in process
mining. as a result, we lift the information gained on the it level to
the business level. this enables us to derive new insights that help or-
ganizations to improve their performance, e.g., an organization may get
insights into the value of its business partnerships to support an ecient
decision making process. this way we hope to bring the merits of bpm
to inter-organizational systems realized by traditional edi standards.
key words: process mining, edi, edifact, inter-organizational busi-
ness processes
?this paper has been produced in the course of the edimine project jointly con-
ducted by the vienna university of technology and the eindhoven university of
technology. edimine is funded by the vienna science and technology fund (wiener
wissenschafts-, forschungs- und technologiefonds, wwtf - http://www.wwtf.at ).2 process mining for electronic data interchange
1 introduction
electronic data interchange (edi) is the exchange of business data between
applications based on a format that is understood by all participating parties
[9]. while recent academic research for web services and business process mod-
eling places lots of emphasis on modeling choreographies of business processes
[2], many inter-organizational business processes are still realized by means of
traditional edi systems. however, traditional edi systems usually lack the ex-
plicit notion of a business process. they are solely responsible for sending and
receiving messages. hence, every exchanged document stands for its own and
the process context is lost. this results in a number of shortcomings.
shortcoming #1 . an inter-organizational business process comprises one or
more message exchanges between companies for conducting an electronic busi-
ness transaction. when companies intend to analyze their inter-organizational
processes they generally have to rely on a-priori models, if models documenting
the business processes exist at all. in case there are models, those may describe
the business processes as they were planned, which is not necessarily in sync
with the real-world business processes.
shortcoming #2 . edi documents convey a lot of redundant information,
while only a minimal subset of the conveyed information is actually sucient for
a certain step of a transaction. in other words, an inter-organizational business
process does not require the exchange of complete business documents as in a
paper-based world, but only the appropriate delta of information required to
handle the next step in the process. as information is electronic, redundant
information does not need to increase the transfer costs. however, it may cause
semantic heterogeneity and additional checks.
shortcoming #3 . the specics of inter-organizational business processes re-
quire not only focusing on the executed activities, but also on the actual ex-
changed business information. however, combined information from process
data and business performance data of the exchanged edi messages, such as
edifact messages, is currently not being exploited in a systematic manner.
despite the attainable insights for decision-making there are { to the best of our
knowledge { no such approaches for edi systems.
in this paper we present an approach, though at an early stage, that addresses
the three shortcomings presented above. we build upon state-of-the-art process
mining techniques [1, 16], which we extend for inter-organizational systems real-
ized by means of edi. thereby, we focus on edifact [3] since traditional edi
standards like edifact and ansi x12 still play a dominant role in business-
to-business (b2b) e-commerce and will presumably continue to be the primary
data formats for automated data exchange between companies for years [19].
however, our approach is generic in terms that it is independent of the underly-
ing transfer syntax. hence, it can also be used for more recent edi formats such
as xml-based business documents.
the remainder of this paper is structured as follows. first, section 2 intro-
duces process mining as enabling technology. however, thus far process mining
it mostly applied within one organization and existing techniques do not exploitprocess mining for electronic data interchange 3
the specics of edi. section 3 elaborates on the principal research questions and
discusses the resulting challenges. in section 4, the technical architecture of our
approach is described. section 5 discusses related work. finally, in section 6 a
summary and conclusion is given.
2 process mining
process mining serves a bridge between data mining and business process mod-
eling [1]. the goal is to extract process-related knowledge from event data stored
in information systems. process mining is an emerging discipline providing com-
prehensive sets of tools to provide fact-based insights and to support process
improvements. this new discipline builds on process model-driven approaches
and data mining.
software 
system
(process)
modelevent
logsmodels
analyzes
discoveryrecords 
events, e.g., 
messages, 
transactions, 
etc.specifies 
configures 
implements
analyzessupports/
controls
enhancementconformance“world”
peoplemachines
organizationscomponentsbusiness
processes
fig. 1. three main types of process mining (discovery, conformance, and enhance-
ment) positioned in the classical setting where event logs are collected within a single
organization
figure 1 shows that process mining establishes links between the actual pro-
cesses and their data on the one hand and process models on the other hand.
today's information systems log enormous amounts of events. classical wfm
systems, bpm systems, erp systems, pdm systems, crm systems, middle-
ware, and hospital information systems provide detailed information about the
activities that have been executed. figure 1 refers to such data as event logs .
information systems that are process-aware provide event logs that can be an-
alyzed directly using existing process mining tools. however, most information
systems store such information in unstructured form, e.g., event data is scat-
tered over many tables or needs to be tapped o from subsystems exchanging4 process mining for electronic data interchange
messages. in such cases, event data exist but some eorts are needed to extract
them. data extraction is an integral part of any process mining eort.
event logs can be used to conduct three types of process mining: (a) discovery,
(b) conformance, and (c) enhancement [1]. the goal of discovery is to extract
models from raw event data in information systems (transaction logs, data bases,
audit trails, etc.). a discovery technique takes an event log and produces a
model without using any a-priori information. an example is the -algorithm
[17] that takes an event log and produces a petri net explaining the behavior
recorded in the log. the second type of process mining is conformance . here,
an existing process model is compared with an event log of the same process.
conformance checking can be used to check if reality, as recorded in the log,
conforms to the model and vice versa. techniques as presented in [14] may be
used to detect, locate and explain deviations, and to measure the severity of these
deviations. the third type of process mining is enhancement . here, the idea is to
extend or improve an existing process model using information about the actual
process recorded in some event log. whereas conformance checking measures
the alignment between model and reality, this third type of process mining aims
at changing or extending the a-priori model, e.g., adding a new perspective
to the process model by cross-correlating it with the log. an example is the
extension of a process model with performance data. for instance, by combining
the timestamps in the event log with the discovered process model it is possible
to show bottlenecks, service levels, throughput times, and frequencies.
a bc
de
startg
endf
fig. 2. process model discovered based on an event log lcontaining 50 cases charac-
terized by sequences of activity names
to illustrate the basic idea of process discovery consider an event log contain-
ing information about 50 cases. each event is characterized by an activity name.
(note that logs also contain timestamps and case data, but we abstract from
these in this simple example.) therefore, we can describe log las a multiset
of traces containing activity names: l=f ha;b;d;c;e;g i18;ha;b;c;d;e;g i12;
ha;b;c;d;e;f;b;d;c;e;g i7;ha;b;d;c;e;f;b;d;c;e;g i5;ha;b;c;d;e;f;b;c;d;e;g i3;
ha;b;c;d;e;f;b;c;d;e;f;b;d;c;e;g i3;ha;b;d;c;e;f;b;c;d;e;f;b;c;d;e;g i2g. there
are 18 cases that have a trace ha;b;d;c;e;g iin the event log, 12 cases followed the
path ha;b;c;d;e;g i, etc. process discovery algorithms such as the -algorithm
[17] can extract a process model from such a log. figure 2 shows the resulting
process model. all trace in lcan be \replayed" by this model. the -algorithm
discovered that all cases start with aand end with g, thatcanddare in par-process mining for electronic data interchange 5
allel, thatfinitiates another iteration, etc. note that here the process model is
represented as a petri net. however, the notation used is not important. process
mining tools such a prom can convert the result to the desirable notation. the
real challenge is to nd the underlying process, not the notation to depict it.
now let us suppose that figure 2 shows the desired process and log lcon-
tains a trace =ha;b;c;e;g i. conformance checking techniques such as the one
described in [14] are able to detect that deviates. these technique can diagnose
an event log, highlight, and quantify deviations.
figure 2 is a bit misleading given its simplicity and focus on control-ow.
process mining is notrestricted to the control-ow perspective and may include
other perspectives such as the resource/organizational dimension, the time/per-
formance dimension, and the object/data dimension. moreover, process mining
techniques can be applied to processes with hundreds of dierent activities, thou-
sands of cases, etc.
using prom, we have applied process mining in over 100 organizations. most
of these applications focus on processes inside one organization. moreover, de-
spite the omnipresence of edi, we are not aware of any process mining appli-
cations systematically analyzing inter-organizational edi data. in figure 2 we
assumed the transitions to be activities. however, in an edi context these may
also correspond to (the sending and/or receiving of) messages.
3 challenges and research questions
to address the shortcomings presented in section 1, we identied the following
set of research questions.
3.1 deriving process choreographies
a choreography describes the public message exchange between multiple par-
ties [11], with the purpose of supporting interoperability. however, traditional
edi systems lack the explicit notion of a business process, since they are solely
responsible for sending and receiving messages. this leads to the rst research
question, which is to derive choreographies of inter-organizational business pro-
cesses based on edi messages that are interchanged between companies.
the hypothesis is that in traditional edi systems choreographies have been
implicitly implemented in the document exchanges, although they have not been
explicitly agreed upon beforehand. we intend to develop means for discovering
these implicit processes by extending current process mining techniques. how-
ever, process mining presupposes the explicit notion of a process (or case) in
order to log activities and to correlate them to instances of a process. hence,
we need to group edi messages to process instances before choreographies can
be derived. thereby, we examine meta-data as well as the actual business data
conveyed in the edi messages, since they carry implicit references to previously
sent messages of the same business case. in other words, we use redundantly6 process mining for electronic data interchange
transferred information in the edi messages to correlate them to business cases.
at the same time, these redundancies are subject to further analyses in edimine
as described in the following section.
3.2 identifying redundancies in business documents
redundant information in edi-based business documents is not problematic for
the cost of its transfer, but it may cause undesired semantic heterogeneity. the
reason for redundancy is twofold:
first, the strategy for standardizing edi documents follows a top-down ap-
proach [10]. this means, that for designing an edi business document type the
various requirements from dierent industry domains have been collected and
incorporated into the standardization work. the resulting business document
type corresponds to a super-set of all the requirements containing a high degree
of optional information as well as having the same type of business information
positioned in dierent places.
second, the absence of an explicit process notion in traditional edi ap-
proaches every business document is rather considered standalone and not in
the context of a set of document exchanges. this has led to the fact that edi
documents convey a lot of redundant information, while only a minimal subset
of the conveyed information is actually sucient for a certain step of a transac-
tion. in other words, an inter-organizational business process does not require
the exchange of complete business documents as in a paper-based world, but
only the appropriate delta of information required to handle the next step in the
process.
this leads us to the second research question which is to develop methods for
identifying the minimum as well as the redundant part of information exchanged
in the course of a discovered edi process. based on this question, the hypothesis
is that inter-organizational process mining allows identifying redundantly trans-
ferred information and, consequently, allows pointing out the minimal subset
of information that is really needed. our objective is to extend existing min-
ing techniques for identifying redundancies. while such methods for identifying
redundancies will be of less utility for already implemented systems, they can
highlight current problems in message and process design. the insights gained
through process mining will be of value for edi-related standardization commit-
tees. for enabling an appropriate comparison of the similarities as well as the
dierences between distinct edi messages it is required to investigate the seman-
tics of the conveyed information. we aim at applying ontological approaches to
assign semantically unambiguous meaning to the exchanged information.
3.3 analyzing business performance
current process mining techniques concentrate on the life cycle of executed ac-
tivities (e.g., started, nished, canceled, suspended, etc.) and their ordering, to
discover the ow of cases in a business process. this is supported by the infor-
mation contained in log les of a process-aware information system. however,process mining for electronic data interchange 7
inter-organizational processes need to be monitored in a dierent manner. the
log les of edi systems are clearly scoped (or limited) to the boundaries of the
system { i.e., sending and receiving messages. at the same time, we are able to
work with richer information by examining the actual content of the messages
that are sent and received by edi systems. in other words, we do not treat trans-
ferred business documents as opaque objects, but combine them with log data.
the resulting research question is whether we can lift the information gained on
the it level (from the log les as well as from the messages) to the business level
in order to support companies in decision-making. in addressing this question,
semantics is one of the key ingredients. we intend to provide a semantic frame-
work for conceptualizing the process data and business data gained on the it
level. the concepts can then be used to build queries on the business level.
our goal is to provide a business cockpit comparable to navigation systems
supporting car drivers [1]. such a system will be able to visualize the networks
of companies, show the ow of business documents and warn about bottlenecks
in document processing. the system may be able to suggest deviations from the
regular process ow in case something goes wrong (i.e., detours) { an example
may be to order from a dierent partner, if an order has been sent, but no
conrmation was received for a certain time. consequently, our objective is to
answer business-related questions on two levels: (i) business process performance
and (ii) general business performance.
questions on the rst level focus on the process performance of an enterprise
with the outside world. they cover the discovery, the monitoring/measuring
(identication of bottlenecks, average durations, etc.), and the improvement of
processes.
questions on the second level focus on business performance with regard
to a company's economic relationships with partners (e.g., number of orders or
order volume as indicators of the economic importance of the partnership, etc.).
having information of their value chain at hand, enterprises are able to identify
value drivers, cost drivers as well as dependencies on external relationships. by
combining process performance and business performance they also gain new
insights on the value of business partnerships (e.g., does the order volume of
a certain partner justify exceptions to the desired workow leading to higher
process costs).
4 architecture
our approach conducted in edimine will be supported and validated by a corre-
sponding tool implementation. thereby, we do not develop a tool from scratch,
but build on an existing open-source solution - the prom tool2[18]. prom is
developed at the eindhoven university of technology and is the most prevalent
tool in the area of process mining. the architecture of prom has been designed
with extensibility in mind by means of plug-ins. we leverage the extensibility
2http://www.processmining.org (visited feb 8, 2011)8 process mining for electronic data interchange
mechanisms of prom by providing the appropriate plug-ins for the aforemen-
tioned research goals.
redundancies
edi log file
edi message
database
xes
representation
              prom plugins
             prom import plugin
          edi systems
preprocessing stage analysis stage
„edi“ ontology
inter-organizational
choreographies
business
performance
fig. 3. preprocessing and analysis stages
figure 3 illustrates the basic architecture of our approach. the starting point
for performing the mining tasks is given by two types of data from the edi
systems of an organization: event logs and the contents of edi messages. in order
to allow for further processing in the prom tool they have to be combined and
transformed to a data structure that conforms to the extensible event stream
(xes) format [18]. xes is an xml-based format for storing event logs and the
standard input format for prom (as of version 6). the conversion is performed
in the preprocessing stage and implemented in a prom import plug-in. in the
subsequent analysis stage, further analyses with regard to the aforementioned
research questions can be performed. the tasks of the analysis stage are also
implemented by means of corresponding prom plug-ins. in the following sections,
the preprocessing and analysis stages are described in detail.
4.1 preprocessing stage
figure 4 illustrates the architecture of the preprocessing stage in more detail.
business partners participating in an inter-organizational edi setting record the
contents of the exchanged business documents and keep a log of the transactions.
such a log is expected to contain information about sender and receiver of the
messages, a timestamp and a reference to the actual message contents. the
provided log data and message contents form the primary input for the edimine
preprocessing plug-in which combines them to a xes-conforming representation.
as described in section 3.1 the log entries have to be grouped according
to process instances. however, since edi systems usually lack awareness of the
underlying business processes in whose context they exchange messages, this isprocess mining for electronic data interchange 9
not a trivial task. to tackle this challenge, we aim at comparing and match-
ing information of the edi message exchanges contained in the logs as well as
pieces of business information which are repeatedly transferred in the individual
messages. this recognition of redundantly transferred information is fostered by
a conceptual representation of the transferred business information. the con-
cepts describing business data elements in edi message types are dened in an
external ontology.
edi system of company a
 (sends/receives edifact messages)edi system of company b
 (sends/receives edifact messages)
  edifact messages edifact messages
edifact log filereferencesprovides creates/provides
„edi“ ontologydescribes
xes representationeach log entry becomes 
an event in xes
ontology elements are referenced 
in modelreference attributesedifact business data is included in the xes event
elements by custom xes extensions
fig. 4. preprocessing log data and message contents for mining
element usage/meaning
log root element of a xes document containing a number of trace s.
trace represents a group of event s which belong to the same process instance.
event contains a single event. in process mining applications this usually
corresponds with the execution of a single activity in a process instance.
table 1. structural elements of a xes document
table 1 lists the structural elements of xes documents and their meanings.
these elements have to be enriched with attributes in the form of key-value
pairs in order to include actual information about recorded events. the xes
standard provides a mechanism through which attributes can be declared in well-
dened extensions to the meta-model of xes. in addition, there are a number of10 process mining for electronic data interchange
predened standard extensions in the xes standard which are generally useful
in process mining contexts.
the edimine preprocessing plug-in converts each log entry from the edi
message exchange log to an event element in a xes representation. furthermore,
the business data payload contained in the conveyed edi messages is included in
attributes which we dene through extending the xes meta-model. moreover,
the concepts used for conceptualizing the business data are referenced through
modelreference attributes using xes' standard extension semantic . the event
elements are grouped to process instances in corresponding trace elements.
4.2 analysis stage
in the analysis stage the prepared xes data serves as a database for mining the
inter-organizational choreographies, for identifying redundancies and for busi-
ness performance analyses. the conceptualization of the edi data by means of
an ontology as described in section 4.1 plays a key role for performing the tasks
of this stage. first of all, it allows for mapping edi message types to concrete and
human-understandable activity labels in the mined inter-organizational chore-
ographies. secondly, it permits the identication of redundancies by matching
the business data contained in the individual edi messages with regard to their
conceptual belonging. thirdly, the knowledge in the ontology is used for busi-
ness performance analyses allowing the user to build sophisticated queries using
the concepts from the ontology. these tasks will be realized in prom plugins;
however, the algorithms for these tasks have yet to be developed and are subject
to further research.
5 related work
process mining techniques [1, 16] extract knowledge about business processes
by analyzing event logs. it is seen as part of business intelligence (i.e., bp
intelligence [8]) and process mining techniques are also being embedded in com-
mercial bpm suites. so far, the focus has been on the analysis of processes
inside a single organization. there exist a few papers on process mining in cross-
organizational settings such as [15], which focuses on choreography conformance
checking between the mined workows from event logs of soap message ex-
changes and abstract bpel models. similarly, [13] also emphasizes on verifying
behavioral properties in web service choreographies. this reveals that process
mining in an inter-organizational context tends to focus on the area of web
services. in practice, however, neither explicit choreography modeling nor web
services are widely employed in electronic business transactions. rather, tradi-
tional approaches to electronic data interchange (edi) such as edifact still
play an overwhelmingly dominant role [3, 19]. in an unpublished work [12], the
topic of mining edi messages has been approached, but best to our knowledge
no further research has been conducted.process mining for electronic data interchange 11
in order to achieve the goals of edimine we intend to conceptualize the
data from edi business documents by means of ontologies. previous attempts
to ontologize various edi standards include works performed in the course of the
tripcom project3[6, 7], which aims at creating an ontological infrastructure for
business processes and business data. tripcom denes ontologies for edi in terms
of both syntax and semantics. however, regarding semantics tripcom focuses
on the structure of message types. in contrary, edimine focuses on building
edi ontologies for business domain specics (e.g., bank transactions, invoice
transactions, etc.) in order to provide a higher conceptual level.
so far, in existing process mining techniques there is little consideration for
the semantics of events. for example, activity names are just considered as labels
without much consideration for the meaning and their relations to other entities.
in the super project4[5], a semantic approach has been developed that aims
at the deployment of semantic bpm techniques. for instance, the sa-mxml
(semantically annotated mining xml) format, an annotated version of the
mxml format, was developed to collect and store event logs such that events
are linked to ontologies. the use of ontologies and reasoners causes an immediate
benet to process mining techniques by raising the level of abstraction from the
syntactic level to the semantic level [4]. however, the mxml format has shown
several limitations which is the reason for chosing the xes format [18].
6 conclusion
in this paper we introduced our approach for mining inter-organizational busi-
ness processes. we discussed the lack of process awareness in common electronic
data interchange (edi) systems and three shortcomings resulting thereof: (i) the
unavailability of information about real-world business process execution, (ii) re-
dundancies in the transferred business documents and (iii) the lack of support
for systematic analyses of business performance and decision-making. we further
described how we intend to address these shortcomings by extending existing
process mining techniques and applying them on inter-organizational systems.
lastly, we proposed a two-staged technical architecture for our approach that
integrates with the existing process mining tool prom by means of plug-ins.
we expect that the unveiling of the inter-organizational choreographies will
help companies to rediscover and document the relationships in their business
network. furthermore, we believe that insights gained from the combination of
process and business performance data will aid companies in decision-making
with regard to their interactions with business partners. finally, methods to
identify redundancies in message exchanges will be less relevant for already im-
plemented edi solutions, but can help standardization bodies to streamline fu-
ture business document standards. the overall goal is to bring the merits of
business process management (bpm) to inter-organizational systems realized
by means of edi.
3http://tripcom.org/ontologies (visited march 14, 2011)
4http://www.ip-super.org (visited march 14, 2011)12 process mining for electronic data interchange
references
1. w.m.p. van der aalst. process mining: discovery, conformance and enhancement
of business processes . springer-verlag, berlin, 2011.
2. a. barros, m. dumas, and p. oaks. standards for web service choreography and
orchestration: status and perspectives. in christoph bussler and armin haller,
editors, business process management workshops , volume 3812 of lecture notes
in computer science , pages 61{74. springer, 2006.
3. j. berge. the edifact standards . blackwell publishers, inc., 1994.
4. a. de medeiros, c. pedrinaci, w. m. p. van der aalst, j. domingue, m. song,
a. rozinat, b. norton, and l. cabral. an outlook on semantic business process
mining and monitoring. in robert meersman, zahir tari, and pilar herrero,
editors, on the move to meaningful internet systems 2007: otm 2007 workshops ,
volume 4806 of lecture notes in computer science , pages 1244{1255. springer,
2007.
5. a. k. alves de medeiros, w. m. p. van der aalst, and c. pedrinaci. semantic
process mining tools: core building blocks. in 16th european conference on
information systems , 2008.
6. d. foxvog and c. bussler. ontologizing edi: first steps and initial experience. in
data engineering issues in e-commerce, 2005. proceedings. international work-
shop on , pages 49 { 58, 2005.
7. d. foxvog and c. bussler. ontologizing edi semantics. in advances in concep-
tual modeling - theory and practice , volume 4231 of lecture notes in computer
science , pages 301{311. springer, 2006.
8. d. grigori, f. casati, m. castellanos, m. shan, u. dayal, and m. sayal. business
process intelligence. computers in industry , 53(3):321{343, 2004.
9. n. c. hill and d. m. ferguson. electronic data interchange: a denition and
perspective. edi forum: the journal of electronic data interchange , 1:5{12,
1989.
10. p. liegl, c. huemer, and c. pichler. a bottom-up approach to build xml busi-
ness document standards. in proceedings of the 7th ieee international confer-
ence on e-business engineering , pages 56{63. ieee, 2010.
11. c. peltz. web services orchestration and choreography. computer , 36:46{52,
2003.
12. t. t. pham. mining of edi data for performance measurement of a supply chain
(unpublished). dicentral corporation, 2003.
13. m. rouached, w. gaaloul, w. m. p. van der aalst, s. bhiri, and c. godart.
web service mining and verication of properties: an approach based on event
calculus. lecture notes in computer science , 4275:408{425, 2006.
14. a. rozinat and w. m. p. van der aalst. conformance checking of processes based
on monitoring real behavior. information systems , 33(1):64{95, 2008.
15. w. m. p. van der aalst, m. dumas, a. rozinat c. ouyang, and h. verbeek.
choreography conformance checking: an approach based on bpel and petri
nets. acm transactions on internet technology , 8(3):29{59, 2008.
16. w. m. p. van der aalst, h. a. reijers, a. j. m. m. weijters, b. f. van dongen,
a. k. alves de medeiros, m. song, and h. m. w. verbeek. business process
mining: an industrial application. information systems , 32:713{732, 2007.
17. w. m. p. van der aalst, a. weijters, and l. maruster. workow mining: discover-
ing process models from event logs. ieee transactions on knowledge and data
engineering , 16(9):1128{1142, 2004.process mining for electronic data interchange 13
18. h. m. w. verbeek, j. c. a. m. buijs, b. f. van dongen, and w. m. p. van der
aalst. xes, xesame, and prom 6. in information systems evolution , volume 72
oflecture notes in business information processing , pages 60{75. springer, 2011.
19. k. vollmer, m. gilpin, and j. stone. b2b integration trends: message formats .
forrester research, 2007.