catchword: b usiness process management in the large 
 
authors : 
dipl. -wirt. -inf. (dh) constantin houy  m.a.  
pd dr. peter fettke  
prof. dr. peter loos  
institute for information systems (iwi) at the german resea rch center for artificial intelligence 
(dfki) gmbh and saarland university, campus building d  32, 66123 saarbrücken, germany  
constantin.houy@iwi.dfki.de  
peter.fettke@iwi.dfki.de  
peter.loos@iwi.dfki.de  
 prof. wil m.p. van der aalst , phd  
department of mathematics and computer science, technische universiteit eindhoven (tu/e), den dolech 2, 5612 az eindhoven, netherlands  
w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tue.nl  
 
prof. john krogstie , phd  
department of computer and information science, norges teknisk- naturvitenskapelige 
universitet (ntnu), sem sælandsvei  7-9, 7491 trondheim , norway  
krogstie@idi.nt nu.no  
 
keywords: business process management, bpm, bpm -in-the-large , complexity  
 
1. increasing complexity of business processes  
in recent years business process management (bpm) attracted considerable attention, both in 
academia and practice. a growing re search community is designing and investigating bpm 
approaches and techniques which are meanwhile widely -used in private and public organizations. 
the quantity and quality of literature concerning bpm, the existence of specialized conferences 
(e.g. the int ernational bpm conference in the ninth year) as well as dedicated journals (e.g. the 
business process management journal) illustrate that bpm has become an established discipline.  
despite the growing maturity of the bpm discipline, many approaches have problems  dealing 
with the challenges posed by real-life bpm applications . corporate reality is often more 
challenging than assumed by contemporary bpm approaches. this situation  is similar to the 
situation of modeling enterprise data (scheer und hars 1992) . common e nterprise -wide data models tend to be complex , difficult to maintain  and mostly lack in supporting flexible and 
decentralized  organizational structures. in order to be able to maintain the different subareas of an 
enterprise -wide data model and to reduce the maintenance complexity, adequate abstraction 
concepts are needed. the same applies to bpm  which also necessitates adequate abstraction 
concepts to handle real -life complexity . large orga nizations have hundreds of different processes 
in place.  well -established reference process models like scheer’s reference model for industrial 
enterprises (scheer 1994)  as well as the sap ref erence model are often disco nnected from  
reality ; real-life companies’ actual business processes are often poorly documented and 
relationships between different process types are not clearly denoted . while conventional bpm 
research often seems to concentrate on single processes or scenarios comprising a few isolated 
processes, the upcoming challenge for bpm is to cope with large sets of inter dependent  inter-
organizational processes in our globalized and interconnected  world . this situation mainly 
originates  from the possibilities created by technical innovations enabling  ubiquitous computing , 
like mobile devices,  sensor technologies  or rfid . however, these possibilities also result in 
increasing complexity and dynamicity of business processes. since existing  bpm techniques and 
tools cannot handle this well, current research activities focus on new approaches for business 
process management in the large  (bpm -in-the-large).  
2. business process management in  the large  
the above described development is comparabl e to different other fields of is research which 
have developed dedicated  approaches for complexity handling mostly  relating to the concept of 
“programming- in-the-large ” (deremer und kron 1975) . such  approaches are  e.g. “software 
engineering in the large” (chiang 1987) , “megaprogramming” (wiederhold et al. 1992) , 
“process modelling in -the-large” for software development processes (bandinelli et al. 1993) , 
“data modeling in the large” (bertram 1994) , “process management in -the-many” (graw und 
gruhn 1995)  and “modeling in the large (modila)” for business processes (raduescu et al. 
2006) . in addition, well known concepts like “very large databases (vldb)” and “very large 
business applications (vl ba)” (grabski et al. 2007)  support very similar ideas of handling 
increasing complexity in different application areas. recently, more and more  bpm approaches 
and techniques, star ted to focus on handling complexity and dynamicity throughout the whole 
bpm life cycle . collaborative modeling, configurable process model s, and process mining are 
examples of approaches which can be summarized under the term “ bpm -in-the-large ” (houy et 
al. 2010b) . in comparison with “ bpm -in-the-small”  these ap proaches support a better complex ity 
handling in real -life bpm scenarios , both tapping automation potentials arising from the vast 
amount of event data generated by the internet of things as well as assisting human actors in designing and coordinating complex real -life business processes. t able 1 summarizes important 
characteristics and contours of bpm -in-the-small and bpm -in-the-large.  
characteristic  bpm -in-the-small  bpm -in-the-large  
1. temporal and spatial extent of 
process definition s focus on one or fe w cooperating 
organizations  focus on comprehensive  supply chains and 
ecosystems containing lots of organizations  
2. structuring of processes  often a  priori fixed process structure  more flexible process structures  which have 
to be adapted to changing situa tions  
3. number of different  
process types  often a  priori fixed number of defined 
core and support processes  increasing number of processes through 
configurable process models and  
large process portfolios  
4. dependency between processes  often few depen dencies  many dependencies  
5. number of process stakeholders  low number of stakeholders  
in single processes  high number of stakeholders  
in inter -organizational processes  
6. dynamics of process change  often stable and seldom  changed 
process structures  often adapted and flexibly configured  
process structures  
7. heterogeneity of applied 
modeling notations  low heterogeneity  high heterogeneity  
8. number of different 
coordinating institutions  of 
cooperative processes  low high 
9. dominant planning direction  often central organization, top -down  decentralized organization, bottom -up 
10. archite cture for bpm  systems  often monolithic  loosely coupled bpm services  
table 1:  characteristics of bpm -in-the-small and bpm -in-the-large, inspired by (vanderhaeghen et al. 2010)  
topics related to bpm -in-the-large are gaining importance . this is illustrated by  dedicated 
workshops such as  the “process in the large” workshop at the 8th bpm conference in 2010.  
against the background of the practical and scientific relevance, there exist many application 
areas and  numerous research endeavors  related to designing and investigating techniques for 
bpm -in-the-large.  
 
3. application areas and current techniques supporting bpm -in-the-large  
relevant application areas and currently investigated techniques for bpm -in-the-large can be 
systemized based on the bpm life cycle, as approaches for each of its  phases are investigated . in 
the following, a selection of relevant  ideas and research interests contributing to bpm -in-the-
large are described and positioned in the bpm life c ycle (figure 1). the following ideas can 
partly also contribute to bpm -in-the-small or pick up ideas from the context of other current 
bpm trends; e.g. bpm 2.0 which applies social software concepts for bpm  (kurz 2011) . 
however, they address the aforementioned character istic requirements concerning large and 
complex process scenarios in the first place.  implementation
executionmonitoring 
and 
controllingoptimization 
and 
improvementdefinition 
and modelingstrategy 
developmentbpm-in-the-smallbpm-in-the-large
• collaborative 
process modeling
• reference modeling 
for large processes
• pluralistic quality 
evaluation of models
• identification of 
structural analogies 
in process models
• configurable models 
for large processes
• large interactive process models• collaborative process modeling
• reference modeling 
for large processes
• pluralistic quality 
evaluation of models
• identification of 
structural analogies 
in process models
• configurable models 
for large processes
• large interactive 
process models
• implementation 
and utilization of 
structural 
analogies in process models
• configuration and 
individualization of 
configurable 
process models
• very large 
business 
applications 
(vlba)• implementation 
and utilization of 
structural 
analogies in 
process models
• configuration and 
individualization of 
configurable 
process models
• very large 
business 
applications (vlba)• interactive process support
• event-driven architectures (eda)
• usage of sensor technologies for 
business process execution support
• very large business applications (vlba)• interactive process support
• event-driven architectures (eda)
• usage of sensor technologies for 
business process execution support
• very large business applications 
(vlba)• usage of sensor 
technologies for 
business process monitoring
• usage of event data 
for business process 
controlling
• mining successful 
large process 
structures• usage of sensor 
technologies for 
business process 
monitoring
• usage of event data 
for business process 
controlling
• mining successful 
large process 
structures• process model 
improvement based 
on collected event data
• process model 
improvement based 
on mined process 
structures• process model 
improvement based 
on collected event data
• process model 
improvement based 
on mined process 
structures• development of business process 
strategy based on event data collected 
in value creation networks
• inter-organizational business process 
maturity models
• smart business process maturity 
models• development of business process 
strategy based on event data collected 
in value creation networks
• inter-organizational business process 
maturity models
• smart business process maturity 
models
 
figure 1  current related work on bpm -in-the-large systemized by the  bpm life cycle , based on  houy et al. (2010a)  
in the process  strategy development  phase  of the bpm life cycle , business strat egy and strategic 
partnerships identify inter -organizational core business processes and inform the modeling phase 
for the development of large scale process models. such models offer the possibility to improve 
the steering of large inter -organizational value creation networks . typically, information quality 
for strategy development gets better  during the process  of continuous process improvement. 
based on event data gathered during the process life cycle  with sensors (houy et al. 2010c)  and 
process mining approaches  (van der aalst et al. 2007) , crucial organizational structures can be 
identified and strategic decisions  be based on real historic data (“evidence- based bpm”) . 
furthermore, business process maturity models (bpmm s) support the strategic improvement of 
process organization and can take cross -organizational process management in to account (van 
looy 2010) . moreover, smart solutions for automated business process maturity assessment are 
currently developed which can serve for adapting maturity levels in strategic alliances between different organizations. 
many research initiatives contributing to bpm -in-the-large concentrate on the process  definition 
and modeling phase as process models provide the basis for the whole bpm life cycle. in inter -
organizational scenarios , approaches for collaborative process modeling play an important role as 
they can support a collective understanding of inter -organizational business processes  (rittgen 2009; dollmann et al. 2011) . reference modeling is also of importance  in bpm -in-the-large . 
reference models aim at describing best practice process structures (fettke und loos 2004)  and 
can also be formulated for and significantly affect large process scenarios. especially in large 
scenarios different dimensions of process quality ha ve an important impact on process 
performanc e and organizational success (krogstie et al. 2006) . in order to be able to assess the 
different quality types, models have to be evaluated from different perspectives. thus, capable 
methods and measur ement concepts of pluralistic model quality evaluation are currently 
investigated , e.g.  in the research project “pluralistique” conducted at the iwi at the dfki funded 
by the german research foundation (dfg) . another interesting approach supporting effecti ve 
design and implementation of processes is concerned with the identification of structural analogies in process models  expressing similarity of model constructs which can be useful for the 
reduction of complexity by providing “common parts” of business process models (houy et al. 2010b) . 
besides the implementation of identified structural analogies, concepts like configurable models 
(
www.processconfiguration.com ) (gottschalk et a l. 2008)  as well as interactive process models 
(jørgensen und krogstie 2008)  are of special importance during the  implementation  and 
execution  phase.  both concepts support flexible process implementation and execution and t hus a 
more agile bpm. h igh agility and fast reactions on changing situations are important  for process 
performance. in this context event -driven architectures  (eda) based on sensor s collecting event 
data play an important  role as they can facilitate interactive process support . especially in large 
process scenarios lots of event data are collected and can be used to improve process performance  
and the agility of reactions on changing business situations  (houy et al. 2010c) . research on 
very large business applications (vlba) is concerned with an effective and efficient 
implementation and execution of a large number of interdependent processes in internal and 
inter-organizational contexts (grabski et al. 2007) . 
event data collected during process execution in large eda also serves for process monitoring 
and controlling. detailed monitoring information principally supports the following process 
improvement phase. based on long- term monitoring data, those process instances can be 
identified which have been most successful  based on process mining methods (van der aalst 
2011)  which can , furthermore , support reference modeling in particular areas. moreover , valuable 
information on anomalies or  critical points in inter -organizational process definitions can be put 
together and serv e for the following optimization and improvement  phase as well as for strategic 
decisions. besides the topics concerning the phases of the life cycle , there are superordinated concepts  
which are relevant for different phases. process mining approaches and tools  such as  prom (www.processmining.org ) can support  process modeling and improvement, the monitoring of 
executed process instances as well as the development of new process strategies based on 
information ex tracted from log files (van der aalst et al. 2007) . furthermore, the idea of large 
process repositories for the management and coordination of many different types of proc ess 
models is of great relevance for following life cycle phases, especially for similarity search 
(kunze und weske 2010)  and process model analysis (niemann et al. 2010) . large repositories 
containing reference models offer interesting possibilities for best practice analysis and bench marking  initiatives . regarding large process repository management , some innovative 
approaches and tools  exist , e.g. apromore (
http://code.google.com/p/apromore ) which offers 
advanced possibilities of large repository management for process models based on different 
modeling languages (la rosa et al. 2011) . another interesting concept concerning  bpm -in-the-
large is the idea of bpm -as-a-service as an innovative architecture approach for bpm systems 
(bpms) w hich aims at providing flexibly composable  bpm services, e.g. services for the 
transformation of models into different languages, for model evaluation, process mining or 
process related telecommunication services organized in service- oriented architectures  (soa) 
(houy et al. 2010c) . bpm -as-a-service offers the potential  to run highly scalable bpms in 
practice and is thus a promising architecture approach for future bpm initiatives. 
4. significance for business and information systems engineering  (bise)  
both bpm research and applications of  bpm technology are characterized by a design -
orientation and focus on the interplay between organizations and information systems. this fits 
well w ith the general scope and focus of  bise. furthermore, bpm methods, techniques and tools 
are meanwhile widely -used and crucial for the success of many organizations. the practical 
relevance of these methods, techniques and tools as well as the presented cur rent challenges 
concerning the increasing complexity of real -life bpm makes bpm -in-the-large a highly 
significant topic for future bise research. design -oriented research initiatives should address 
these current challenges and develop relevant approaches  for handling complexity in bpm  
practice.  
5. conclusion  
in this article, we have given pointers to current topics and research initiatives concerning bpm -
in-the-large  as an umbrella term for the description of approaches for complexity handling in  
real-life bpm scenarios. in this context , bpm -in-the-large should not be understood as a new 
method or tool but as a research stream focusing  on relevant challenges of current bpm practice.  
promising approaches  that assist in making bpm -in-the-large a reality  are cu rrently developed 
and investigated by the bise community.  references  
bandinelli s, fuggetta a, grigolli s (1993) process modelling in -the-large with slang. proceedings of thre second 
international conference on the software process. ber lin, germany, 75 -83 
bertram m (1994) data modelling in the large. acm sigmod record 23(4): 8 -12 
chiang jc (1987) software engineering in the large. proceedings of the national computer conference. chicago, usa, 
475 
deremer f, kron h (1975) programming -in-the large versus programming -in-the-small. the international conference on 
reliable software. los angeles, california, 114 -121 
dollmann t, houy c, fettke p, loos p (2011) collaborative business process modeling with comomod - a toolkit for 
model integration in distributed cooperation environments. in: reddy s, tata s ( eds) proceedings of the 20th ieee 
international conference on collaboration technologies and infrastructures. ieee international workshops on 
enabling technologies: infrastructure for collabora tive enterprises (wetice -2011). paris, france, 217- 222 
fettke p, loos p (2004) referenzmodellierungsforschung. wirtschaftsinformatik 46(5): 331- 340 
gottschalk f, van der aalst wmp, jansen -vullers m, la rosa m (2008) configurable workflow models. international 
journal on cooperative information systems 17(2): 177- 221 
grabski b, günther s, herden s, krüger l, rautenstrauch c, zwanziger a (2007) very large business applications. 
informatik spektrum 30(4): 259 -263 
graw g, gruhn v (1995) process management in -the-many. in: schäfer w  (ed) software process technology, lncs 913. 
springer, berlin, 163 -178 
houy c, fettke p, loos p (2010a) empirical research in business process management - analysis of an emerging field of 
research. business process management journal 16(4): 619- 661 
houy c, fettke p, loos p, van der aalst wmp, krogstie j (2010b) bpm -in-the-large - towards a higher level of 
abstraction in business process management. in: janssen m, lamersdorf w, pries -heje j, rosemann m  (eds) e-
government and e -services (eges) / global information systems processes (gisp) 2010. world computer congress 
(wcc -2010), brisbane, australia, advances in information and communication technology (ifip aict)  334. 
springer, berlin, 237 -248 
houy c, reiter m, fettke p, loos p (2010c) p otential of service -oriented architectures for bpm software tools (published 
in german: potentiale serviceorientierter architekturen für software- werkzeuge des geschäftsprozessmanagements). 
in: esswein w, turowski k, juhrisch m  (eds) mobis 2010. modellieru ng betrieblicher informationssysteme (mobis -
2010). gesellschaft für informatik, bonn, dresden, germany, 211- 227 
jørgensen h, krogstie j (2008) interactive models for virtual enterprises. in: clark s (ed) end user computing: concepts, 
methodologies, tools, and application. igi global, hershey, usa, 715- 730 
krogstie j, sindre g, jørgensen h (2006) process models representing knowledge for action: a revised quality framework. 
european journal of information systems 15(1): 91- 102 
kunze m, weske m (2010) metric trees for efficient similarity search in large process model repositories. proceedings 
of the 1st international workshop on process in the large (iw -pl 2010) (pre -proceedings), stevens institute of 
technology, hoboken, nj, usa  
kurz m (2011) bpm 2.0: selbst organisation im geschäftsprozessmanagement. in: sinz ej, bartmann d, bodendorf f, 
ferstl ok  (eds) dienstorientierte it -systeme für hochflexible geschäftsprozesse, schriften aus der fakultät 
wirtschaftsinformatik und angewandte informatik der otto- friedrich -universität bamberg  9. university of bamberg 
press, bamberg, 193 -216 
la rosa m, reijers ha, van der aalst wmp, dijkman rm, mendling j, dumas m, garcía -bañuelos l (2011) 
apromore: an advanced process model repository. expert systems with applications 38(6) : 7029- 7040  
niemann m, siebenhaar m, eckert j, steinmetz r (2010) process model analysis using related cluster pairs. proceedings 
of the 1st international workshop on process in the large (iw -pl 2010) (pre -proceedings), stevens institute of 
technology, hoboken, nj, usa 
raduescu c, tan hm, jayaganesh m, bandara w, zur muehlen m, lippe s (2006) a framework of issues in large 
process modeling projects. in: ljungberg j, andersson m ( eds) proceedings of the 14th european conference on 
information systems. göteborg, sweden  
rittgen p (2009) collaborative modeling of business processes: a comparative case study. proceedings of the 2009 acm 
symposium on applied computing. honolulu, hawaii, 225- 230 
scheer a -w (1994) business process engineering -  reference models fo r industrial companies. springer, berlin  
scheer a -w, hars a (1992) extending data modeling to cover the whole enterprise. communications of the acm 35(9): 
166-172 
van der aalst wmp (2011) process mining: discovery, conformance and enhancement of business p rocesses. springer, 
berlin  
van der aalst wmp, reijers ha, weijters a, van dongen bf, de medeiros aka, song m, verbeek hmw (2007) 
business process mining: an industrial application. information systems 32(5): 713- 732 
van looy a (2010) does it matter for bus iness process maturity? a comparative study on business process maturity 
models. in: meersman r, herrero p  (eds) otm 2010 workshops, lncs 6428. springer, berlin, 687- 697 
vanderhaeghen d, fettke p, loos p (2010) organizational and technological options for business process management 
from the perspective of web 2.0 - results of a design oriented research approach with particular consideration of 
self-organization and collective intelligence. business & information systems engineering 2(1): 15- 28 
wiederhold g , wegner p, ceri s (1992) toward megaprogramming. communications of the acm 35 (11): 89- 99 