intra- and inter-organizational process mining:
discovering processes within and between
organizations
wil m.p. van der aalst
eindhoven university of technology, po box 513,
nl-5600 mb, eindhoven, the netherlands
w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tue.nl ,
www home page: vdaalst.com
abstract. due to the availability of more and more event data and
mature process mining techniques, it has become possible to discover
the actual processes within an organization. process mining techniques
use event logs to automatically construct process models that explain
the behavior observed. existing process models can be validated using
conformance checking techniques. moreover, the link between real-life
events and model elements allows for the projection of additional infor-
mation onto process models (e.g., showing bottlenecks and the ow of
work within an organization). although process mining has been mainly
used within individual organizations, this new technology can also be
applied in cross-organizational settings. in this paper, we identify such
settings and highlight some of the challenges and opportunities. in par-
ticular, we show that cross-organizational processes can be partitioned
along two orthogonal dimensions. this helps us to identify relevant pro-
cess mining challenges involving multiple organizations.
key words: process mining, cross-organizational mining, business pro-
cess management
1 process mining
we have applied process mining in over 100 organizations [4]. our experiences
show that process mining is a new and exiting technology that can be applied in
a variety of domains (healthcare, governments, banking, insurance, education,
retail, production, transportation, high-tech systems, etc.). however, lion's share
of today's process mining projects are conducted within a single organization,
whereas many processes are distributed over multiple organizations and dier-
ent organizations are executing similar processes. therefore, this paper aims
to describe the various cross-organizational settings where process mining can
be used. before doing so, we provide a brief overview of the state-of-the-art in
process mining.
process mining provides a new means to improve processes in a variety of
application domains. there are two main drivers for this new technology. on2 wil m.p. van der aalst
the one hand, more and more events are being recorded thus providing detailed
information about the history of processes. on the other hand, there is a need
to improve and support business processes in competitive and rapidly changing
environments.
register 
requestexamine 
casuallyexamine 
thoroughly
check ticketdecidepay 
compensation
reject 
request
reinitiate 
requeststartend
performance information (e.g., the average time 
between two subsequent activities) can be extracted 
from the event log and visualized on top of the model.a
aaa
am
mpete
mike
ellenrole a:
assistant
sue
seanrole e:
expert
sararole m:
manager
decision rules (e.g., a decision 
tree based on data known at 
the time a particular choice 
was made) can be learned 
from the event log and used to 
annotated decisions.the event log can be 
used to discover roles in 
the organization (e.g., 
groups of people with 
similar work patterns). 
these roles can be used 
to relate individuals and 
activities.
e
discovery techniques can be used to find a 
control-flow model (in this case in terms of bpmn) 
that describes the observed behavior best.
starting point is an event log. each event refers to a 
process instance (case) and an activity. events are 
ordered and additional properties (e.g. timestamp or 
resource data) may be present.
fig. 1. process mining techniques extract knowledge from event logs in order to dis-
cover, monitor and improve processes [4].
process mining is a relative young research discipline that sits between com-
putational intelligence and data mining on the one hand, and process modeling
and analysis on the other hand. the idea of process mining is to discover, monitorintra- and inter-organizational process mining 3
and improve real processes (i.e., not assumed processes) by extracting knowledge
from event logs readily available in today's systems (see fig. 1). note that pro-
cess mining includes (automated) process discovery (extracting process models
from an event log), conformance checking (monitoring deviations by comparing
model and log), social network/organizational mining, automated construction
of simulation models, case prediction, and history-based recommendations. pro-
cess mining provides an important bridge between data mining and business pro-
cess modeling and analysis. over the last decade, event data have become readily
available and process mining techniques have matured. moreover, process mining
algorithms have been implemented in various academic and commercial systems.
today, there is an active group of researchers working on process mining and
it has become one of the \hot topics" in business process management (bpm)
research. moreover, there is a huge interest from industry in process mining.
more and more software vendors started adding process mining functionality to
their tools. examples of software products with process mining capabilities are:
aris process performance manager, enterprise visualization suite, interstage
bpme, okt process mining suite, process discovery focus, processanalyzer,
prom, rbminer/dbminer, reect jone, and reect.
starting point for process mining is an event log . all process mining tech-
niques assume that it is possible to sequentially record events such that each
event refers to an activity (i.e., a well-dened step in the process) and is related
to a particular case (i.e., a process instance). event logs may store additional
information about events. in fact, whenever possible, process mining techniques
use extra information such as the resource (i.e., person or device) executing or
initiating the activity, the timestamp of the event, or data elements recorded
with the event (e.g., the size of an order).
basically, there are three types of process mining. the rst type of process
mining is discovery . a discovery technique takes an event log and produces a
model without using any a-priori information. process discovery is the best-
known process mining technique. for many organizations it is surprising that
existing techniques are able to discover the real process based on the example
executions in the event log. the second type of process mining is conformance .
here, an existing process model is compared with an event log of the same
process. conformance checking can be used to check if reality, as recorded in the
log, conforms to the model and vice versa. the third type of process mining is
enhancement . here, the idea is to extend or improve an existing process model
using information about the actual process recorded in some event log. whereas
conformance checking measures the alignment between model and reality, this
third type of process mining aims at changing or extending the a-priori model.
for instance, by using timestamps in the event log one can extend the model to
show bottlenecks, service levels, throughput times, and frequencies.
process mining may cover dierent perspectives. the control-ow perspective
focuses on the control-ow, i.e., the ordering of activities. the goal of mining
this perspective is to nd a good characterization of all possible paths, e.g.,
expressed in terms of a petri net or some other notation (e.g., epcs, bpmn,4 wil m.p. van der aalst
and uml ads). the organizational perspective focuses on information about
resources hidden in the log, i.e., which actors (e.g., people, systems, roles, and
departments) are involved and how are they related. the goal is to either struc-
ture the organization by classifying people in terms of roles and organizational
units or to show the social network. the case perspective focuses on properties
of cases. obviously, a case can be characterized by its path in the process or
by the originators working on it. however, cases can also be characterized by
the values of the corresponding data elements. for example, if a case represents
a replenishment order, it may be interesting to know the supplier or the num-
ber of products ordered. the time perspective is concerned with the timing and
frequency of events. when events bear timestamps it is possible to discover bot-
tlenecks, measure service levels, monitor the utilization of resources, and predict
the remaining processing time of running cases.
moreover, process mining can be used in online and oine settings. the
results of process mining may be used to reason about processes (redesign) and
to make decisions inside processes (operational support).
for a more comprehensive introduction to process mining, we refer to [4].
2 intra- and inter-organizational processes
although most applications of process mining have been conducted inside a
particular organization, there is no foundational reason why the technology can-
not be applied across dierent organizations. of course there may be issues
related to condentially, privacy, and data heterogeneity. in this paper we ab-
stract from such problems and simply explore the possibilities of intra- and inter-
organizational process mining. for this purpose, we consider two basic settings:
(a)collaboration and (b) exploiting commonality .
in a collaborative setting, dierent organizations work together to handle
process instances. a process instance , often referred to as case, corresponds to
the \thing" that needs to be handled (e.g., a customer placing an order, a patient
having a decease that needs to be treated, or a citizen applying for a building
permit). the work associated to a case may be distributed over dierent orga-
nizations in a collaborative setting.
in the other basic setting (i.e., exploiting commonality) there are dierent
organizations essentially doing the same thing. for example, there are 430 dutch
municipalities handing out building permits. here the goal is not to distribute
the work associated to a case as dierent organizations can do (more-or-less) the
same thing. organizations that have processes in common may be in competi-
tion, however, they can also learn from one another and share experiences and
infrastructures. for example, dutch municipalities are not competing with re-
spect to handing out building permits. although they may be competing for new
citizens, they can still share a common it infrastructure and share experiences
to better (e.g. faster or more ecient) handle requests for building permits.intra- and inter-organizational process mining 5
2.1 collaboration: distributing the work among dierent
organizations
first of all, we consider the collaborative setting where dierent organizations
work together to handle process instances. this requires that the dierent parties
are able to inter-operate, i.e., coordinate their activities. in [1], we identied ve
forms of interoperability . these are depicted in fig. 2 and described next.
{ the rst form of interoperability is capacity sharing . this form of interop-
erability assumes centralized control, i.e., the routing of cases is under the
control of a single organization. the execution of tasks is distributed, i.e.,
resources of dierent organizations may execute tasks.
{ the second form of interoperability is chained execution : the process is split
into a number of disjoint subprocesses which are executed by organizations in a
sequential order. this form of interoperability requires that a partner transfers
or initiates the ow for a case after completing all the work. in contrast to
capacity sharing, the control of the workow is distributed over the dierent
organizations.
{ the third form of routing is subcontracting . in this setting, one organiza-
tion subcontracts subprocesses to other organizations. consider for example
fig. 2(c) where two subprocesses are subcontracted. for the top-level orga-
nization the two subcontracted subprocesses appear to be atomic. for the
two organizations executing subcontracted work, the subprocesses can be very
complex. note that the control is hierarchical, i.e., although there is a top-level
actor, control is distributed in a tree-like fashion.
{ the fourth form of interoperability is case transfer . each organization has a
copy of the same process description, i.e., the process specication is repli-
cated. however, at any time, each case resides at exactly one location. cases
(i.e., process instances) can be transferred from one organization to another.
a case can be transferred to balance the workload or because tasks are not im-
plemented at all organizations. note that in fig. 2(d) it is essentially assumed
that each of the organizations uses the same process denition (although some
may implement only a part of it).
{ the last form of interoperability is shown in fig. 2(e): loosely coupled . for
this form of interoperability the process is cut in pieces which may be active
concurrently. moreover, the denition of each of the subprocesses is local, i.e.,
the environment does not need to know the process. only the protocol which
is used to communicate is public for the other parties involved.
note that chained execution and subcontracting can be seen as loosely cou-
pled processes. one can think of such processes as \jigsaw puzzles", i.e., the
overall process is cut into parts that t well together. case transfer uses a dif-
ferent kind of partitioning: cases rather than process fragments are partitioned.
capacity sharing is the only form of interoperability which does not require
some partitioning of the process and its instances. we will not consider this for
of interoperability as conventional process mining techniques can be used.6 wil m.p. van der aalst
 
   (a) capacity sharing
 
   (b) chained execution
 
 
 
 
  
(c) subcontracting
 
 
  
  
 
(d) case transfer
 
   
(e) loosely coupled
fig. 2. dierent ways of distributing work in a collaborative setting [1].
2.2 exploiting commonality: sharing knowledge and infrastructures
as indicated earlier we consider two basic settings: (a) collaboration (cf. fig. 2)
and (b) exploiting commonality. now we focus on the latter one. this type of
cross-organizational processes does not involve interoperability, i.e., there is no
explicit distribution of work. instead, organizations are executing essentially the
same process while sharing experiences, knowledge or a common infrastructure .
to better understand such cross-organizational processes, we consider some ex-
amples taken from [2, 3, 7].
{ there are about 430 municipalities in the netherlands. in principle, they all
execute variants of the same set of processes. for example, they all support
processes related to building permits, such as the process handling applications
for permits and the process for handling objections against such permits.
{suncorp is the largest australian insurance group. the suncorp group oers
various types of insurance using brands such as suncorp, aami, apia, gio,
just car, bingle, vero, etc. there are insurance processes related to dierentintra- and inter-organizational process mining 7
types of risks (home, motor, commercial, liability, etc.) and these processes
exist for the dierent suncorp brands. hence, there are up to 30 dierent
variants of the process of handling an insurance claim at suncorp.
{hertz is the largest car rental company in the world with more than 8,000
locations in 146 countries. all oces of hertz need to support the same set
of processes, e.g., how to process a reservation. however, there are subtle dif-
ferences among the processes at dierent locations due to regional or national
variations. for example, the law in one country or the culture in a particular
region forces hertz to customize the standard process for dierent locations.
{ the sales processes of many organizations are managed and supported by
salesforce . on the one hand, these organizations share an infrastructure (pro-
cesses, databases, etc.). on the other hand, they are not forced to follow a
strict process model as the system can be congured to support variants of
the same process.
{easychair supports the review processes of many conferences. on the one
hand, conferences share common functionality and processes. on the other
hand, many variations are possible.
organizations such as suncorp and hertz need to support many variants
of the same process ( intra-organizational variation ). dierent municipalities in
a country need to oer the same set of services to their citizens, and, hence,
need to manage similar collections of processes. however, due to demographics
and political choices, municipalities are handling things dierently. sometimes
these dierences are unintentional; however, often these dierences can be easily
justied by the desired \couleur locale" ( inter-organizational variation ).
the cross-organizational processes mentioned above refer to a dierent type
of cooperation than the dierent ways of distributing work depicted in fig. 2.
organizations can learn from one another. for example, one municipality may
improve its processes by learning from experiences of a better performing mu-
nicipality. moreover, if there a sucient commonalities, organizations may want
to share congurable processes and infrastructures [2, 3, 7].
2.3 horizontal and vertical partitioning
after discussing the two basic forms of cross-organizational processes (collabo-
ration and exploiting commonality), we conclude that there are two partitioning
dimensions: the case dimension and the process dimension. vertical partitioning
uses the case dimension to partition work, i.e., the cases are distributed over sev-
eral organizations but the process is not cut into pieces. horizontal partitioning
is based on the process dimension, i.e., the process is cut into pieces and orga-
nizations are responsible for specic parts of the jigsaw puzzle. the partitioning
dimensions are in principle orthogonal but combinations are possible.
chained execution, subcontracting, and loosely coupled, as described using
fig. 2, correspond to horizontal partitioning. case transfer (fig. 2(d)) and ex-
ploiting commonality (section 2.2) correspond to vertical partitioning. figure 3
illustrates these two partitioning dimensions. traditionally, process mining has8 wil m.p. van der aalst
 horizontal partitioning: process is split into partsvertical partitioning: 
different instances/
variants of the same 
process
fig. 3. two partitioning dimensions: (a) horizontal partitioning and (b) vertical par-
titioning.
been focusing on processes that are not partitioned, i.e., all process instances
belong to the same monolithic process. as will be shown in the reminder, the
two dimensions shown in fig. 3 can be used to structure the dierent process
mining challenges.
3 challenges for process mining
in section 1 we introduced process mining as a new technology to analyze oper-
ational processes based on the footprints they leave in event logs. subsequently,
we provided a classication of intra- and inter-organizational processes in sec-
tion 2. based on this we identied two main partitioning dimensions as shown
in fig. 3. these two partitioning dimensions serve as the basis for discussing
various process mining challenges.
3.1 horizontal partitioning
a process that is partitioned horizontally can be seen as a jigsaw puzzle. each
\puzzle piece" corresponds to a fragment of the overall process and is un-
der the control of one organization. in the classical setting (i.e., single pro-
cess/organization) it is possible to capture all events relevant for a particular
process, e.g., one can extract data from an sap system clearly showing all steps
taken in a particular process. however, when a process is partitioned horizon-
tally one cannot assume this. an organization can only see some of the \puzzle
pieces". it can see all events related to the puzzle pieces it is responsible for.
moreover, it can see the interactions with other puzzle pieces.
in a horizontally partitioned process there needs to be interaction between
the dierent pieces. typically, messages are exchanged between the puzzle pieces
controlled by dierent organizations. consider for example soap or edi mes-
sages. soap (simple object access protocol) is a protocol specication for
exchanging messages between web services. it uses a rather generic xml for-
mat which species a soap envelope consisting of a header and body. elec-intra- and inter-organizational process mining 9
tronic data interchange (edi) standards such as un/edifact (united na-
tions/electronic data interchange for administration, commerce and trans-
port) impose more constraints on the messages being exchanged. the dierent
elds in an edi message have a predened meaning. note that messages can be
exchanged in a synchronous or asynchronous manner. in some cases there may
also be a party that is able to observe all message exchanges without being able
to look \inside the puzzle pieces".
hence, the main challenge is to conduct process mining while only seeing a
part of the overall process [5]. typical questions are:
{ how to discover a process model when only seeing message exchanges and/or
local events?
{ how to check conformance when only seeing message exchanges and/or local
events?
{ how to identify bottlenecks when only seeing message exchanges and/or local
events?
{ how to correlate messages to process instances? when sending a message
from one organization to another it needs to be routed to the appropriate
instance of the process. this is a problem that is often underestimated and
most researchers simply abstract from it [6].
{ how to deal with many-to-many relationships across dierent organizations?
one customer order may correspond to many order lines that may or may
not be combined in dierent deliveries. besides the problem of correlating
messages there is the problem that one instance in one organization may refer
to multiple instances in another organization and vice versa [4].
since more and more processes are distributed over multiple organizations, it is
important to address the above questions.
3.2 vertical partitioning
when a process is partitioned vertically, cases are distributed over several orga-
nizations each using their own variant of the process. these organizations may
collaborate (see case transfer style of interoperability illustrated by fig. 2(d)) or
simply share knowledge and infrastructures. the metaphor of the jigsaw puzzle
is not applicable anymore. a better metaphor is the \spot the dierence game"
children like to play (i.e., looking at two gures to nd the dierences between
both). the bottom line is that there are dierent events logs all referring to
some variant of the same process. the challenge is to analyze commonalities and
dierences between these processes based on the dierent event logs [2, 3, 7].
besides a pair-wise comparison of logs and models, we can also use supervised
learning to explain dierences. for example, we can use classication techniques
such as decision tree learning. for this purpose we need to label the data at the
level of cases or at the level of event logs. classication is based on a selected
response variable and a set of predictor variables . for example, the response
variable could be the (average) ow time or costs of a case or log. the tness
of an event log or case with respect to some reference model can also be taken10 wil m.p. van der aalst
as a response variable. predictor variables are other properties of cases, event
logs, or process models. for example, the complexity of the process model and
the number or resources involved. based on such information one can construct
a decision tree that aims to explain the response variable in terms of predictor
variables . this assists in understanding the essential dierences between dierent
organizations. for example, classication based on logs of dierent municipali-
ties may reveal that (a) larger municipalities tend to have fewer deviations, (b)
allowing for more concurrency results in shorter ow times but more deviations,
and (c) a pre-check of building permits results in shorter ow times and a higher
acceptance rate.
in [7], we provide some initial results obtained in the coselog project. in this
project, 10 of the 430 dutch municipalities are participating to investigate how
process mining, congurable process models, and cloud technology can be used to
reduce costs and improve service. all dutch municipalities need to oer the same
services to their citizens, and need to manage similar collections of processes.
however, due to demographics and political choices, municipalities are handling
things dierently. the ten municipalities involved in coselog are eager to learn
\proven best practices" from one another. this can be operationalized using
cross-organizational process mining.
4 conclusion
although process mining is often applied within the boundaries of individual
organizations, there are many process management questions that transcend the
level of a single organization. dierent organizations need to cooperate to real-
ize a process, share an infrastructure, or may want to learn from one another.
however, very few applications of process mining have been documented in liter-
ature. therefore, this paper aims to structure the dierent cross-organizational
settings in which process mining can be applied. based on this, we highlighted
some of the key questions. currently, we are involved in several research projects
that aim to address these questions:
{ the edimine project ( http://edimine.ec.tuwien.ac.at ) seeks to extend
current process mining approaches in order to apply them to inter-organizational
business processes while building on the additional information provided by
traditional electronic data interchange (edi) standards. advantages of using
edi technology are its widespread use and standardization of message content.
{ the coselog project ( http://www.win.tue.nl/coselog/wiki/start ) fo-
cuses on a particular application domain: dutch municipalities. since all of
these municipalities need to execute the same collection of processes, it is in-
teresting to analyze dierences and commonalities. the goal is to let these
municipalities learn from one another and share a common (congurable) in-
frastructure.
{ the acsi project ( http://www.acsi-project.eu/ ) uses artifact-centric mod-
eling approaches to support service collaborations in open business networks.intra- and inter-organizational process mining 11
process mining is used to understand such collaborations and to improve per-
formance.
references
1. w.m.p. van der aalst. process-oriented architectures for electronic commerce and
interorganizational workow. information systems , 24(8):639{671, 2000.
2. w.m.p. van der aalst. congurable services in the cloud: supporting variability
while enabling cross-organizational process mining. in r.meersman, t. dillon,
and p. herrero, editors, otm federated conferences, 18th international conference
on cooperative information systems (coopis 2010) , volume 6426 of lecture notes
in computer science , pages 8{25. springer-verlag, berlin, 2010.
3. w.m.p. van der aalst. business process conguration in the cloud: how to sup-
port and analyze multi-tenant processes? in g. zavattaro and u. schreier, editors,
proceedings of the 9th ieee european conference on web services (ecows 2011) .
ieee computer society press, 2011.
4. w.m.p. van der aalst. process mining: discovery, conformance and enhancement
of business processes . springer-verlag, berlin, 2011.
5. w.m.p. van der aalst, m. dumas, c. ouyang, a. rozinat, and h.m.w. verbeek.
conformance checking of service behavior. acm transactions on internet tech-
nology , 8(3):29{59, 2008.
6. w.m.p. van der aalst, a.j. mooij, c. stahl, and k. wolf. service interaction:
patterns, formalization, and analysis. in m. bernardo, l. padovani, and g. za-
vattaro, editors, formal methods for web services , volume 5569 of lecture notes
in computer science , pages 42{88. springer-verlag, berlin, 2009.
7. j.c.a.m. buijs, b.f. van dongen, and w.m.p. van der aalst. towards cross-
organizational process mining in collections of process models and their exe-
cutions. in international workshop on process model collections (pmc 2011) .
springer-verlag, berlin, 2011.