using process mining to bridge the gap 
between  bi and bpm  
wil van der aalst  
eindhoven university of technology, the netherlands  
 
process mining techniques enable process -centric analytics through automated 
process discovery, conformance checking, and model enhancement.  
 
the spectacular growth of digitized information makes it possible to systematically 
collect business -related events. the term business intelligence  (bi) refers to a broad 
range of tools and techniques that use such event data to support  decision making. 
under the “bi umbrella ” many three -letter acronyms have been introduced to refer to 
rather simple reporting  and dashboard tools , e.g., business activity monitor ing (bam), 
corporate performance management (cpm) , continuous process improvement (cpi), 
and business process intelligence (bpi). only few bi tools offer mature data mining 
capabilities , and even the tools that do so , are not process -centric, i.e., the focus is on 
data and local decision  making  rather than  end-to-end processes.  
business process management  (bpm) techniques and tools on the other hand evolve 
around process models. more and more organizations are using bpm systems to 
support their operational processes . process models are used to configure such 
systems and to analyze “as -is” and “to -be” processes. unfortunately, these models are 
often completely disconnected from actual event data . analysis results are unreliable 
because they are not based on observed facts, but on a n idealized model of  reality. 
process mining aims to bridge the gap between bi and bpm. the combination of both 
process models and event data allows for new forms of process -centric analytics.  
starting point for proces s mining is an event log . each event in such a log refers to a n 
activity  (i.e., a well -defined step in some process) and is related to a particular case (i.e., 
a process instance ). the events belonging to a case are ordered  and describe  one “run”  
of the process.  event logs may store additional information about events.  in fact, 
whenever possible , process mining techniques use supplementary information  such as 
the resource  (i.e., person or device) executing or initiating the activity, the timestamp  of 
the event, and other  data attributes  (e.g., the size of an orde r). typically, three types of process mining can be distinguished:  (a) process  discovery , (b) 
conformance  checking , and (c) model  enhancement  (w. van der aalst, process mining: 
discovery, conformance and enhancement of business processes , springer -verlag , 
2011). discovery  techniques learn a mod el fro m an event log without using any 
additional information. this results in a so -called initial process model. this model can 
also be made by hand. in both situations, conformance checking techniques can be 
used to compare the observed behavior (event logs) with the modeled behavior (initial 
process model). this results in diagnostics showing deviations between model and log.  
after conformance checking, model and log are aligned and information from the log 
may b e used to enhance the model. the model may be repaired or extended with other 
perspectives such as the time or resource perspective. for example, timestamps in the 
event log may be used to add timing information (waiting times and service times) to the 
model. such an extended model can be used for decision support.  
process
discoveryinformation 
systems
event logmachinespeople
organizations
model 
enhancementconformance 
checking
enhanced
process 
modeldiagnostics
initial
process 
model
 
figure 1. there are three basic types of process mining: (a) process discovery  techniques automatically 
learn models from event logs, (b) conformance checking  techniques diagnose difference s between  
model and reality (as observed through event logs), and (c) existing models (discovered or made by 
hand) can also be repaired or extended  using event data  (model enhancement ). 
process discovery  
events are related to particular process instances, e.g., a blood test in a hospital is 
related to a patient being treated and a payment transaction in a sales process is related 
to a particular customer order. all events related to a particular  process ins tance (i.e., 
case) can be ordered. since these events also refer to activities, we can describe each 
case as a trace of activity names.  for a process with activities a, b, c, d, and e, we may find the following traces: abce , 
acbe , and ade. for example, an event log may contain information about  238 cases 
following trace abce , 56 cases following trace acbe, and 88 cases following trace 
ade. process discovery algorithms can transform such an event log into a process 
model that adequately describes the  observe d behavior . for this simple  example it is 
easy to construct a process that always starts with activity a, ends with activity e, and in -
between either b and c occur (in any order) or just d occurs. for processes consisting 
of dozens or even hundreds of activities, this is much more challenging.  
figure 2 shows a fragment of a larger event log  from a claim handling process . based 
on such an event log we can learn the control -flow model showing the ordering of 
activities. the discovered model depicted in fi gure 2 is expressed in th e so-called 
bpmn notation and nicely illustrates that concurrency, choices, loops, and other control -
flow constructs can be learned from example traces. as shown , the process always 
starts with activity register request  and ends wi th pay compensation  or reject request . 
the examination and the checking of the ticket can be do ne concurrently.  there are two 
types of examinations. the decision to pay or to reject is based on the examination and 
check activities. it is also possible that  no decision can be made yet. activity  reinitiate 
request  restarts the examination and check activities  thus modeling a loop construct.  
in recent years, dozens of process discovery algorithms have been proposed. they are 
able to extract models fro m a wide variety of events logs in different domains (banking, 
insurance,  manufacturing,  high-tech systems, e-government,  e-learning, logistics, and 
healthcare).  register 
requestexamine 
casuallyexamine 
thoroughly
check ticketdecidepay 
compensation
reject 
request
reinitiate 
requeststartend
performance information (e.g., the average time 
between two subsequent activities) can be extracted 
from the event log and visualized on top of the model.a
aaa
am
mpete
mike
ellenrole a:
assistant
sue
seanrole e:
expert
sararole m:
managerdecision rules (e.g., a decision tree based 
on data known at the time a particular 
choice was made) can be learned from 
the event log and used to annotate 
decisions.the event log can be 
used to discover roles 
in the organization 
(e.g., groups of 
people with similar 
work patterns). these 
roles can be used to 
relate individuals and 
activities.
e
discovery techniques can be used to find a control-
flow model (in this case in terms of a bpmn model) 
that describes the observed behavior best.starting point is an event log. 
each event refers to a process 
instance (case) and an 
activity. events are ordered 
and additional properties (e.g. 
timestamp or resource data) 
may be present.
 
figure 2. overview of process mining showing the different process mining perspectives (control -flow, 
time, resource, and data)  extracted from the event log .  
conformance checking  
process models may be descriptive  (showing what really happens) or normative  
(definin g what should happen) and can be made by hand or discovered through process 
mining. in all cases it is interesting to compare model and reality (as recorded in the 
event log). conformance checking tec hniques can be used to discover  discrepancies 
between th e modeled behavior and the observed behavior. these techniques provide 
metrics for the degree of conformance and diagnostic information explaining the 
observed differences.  moreover, it is possible to drill down and apply process discovery 
techniques to th e non -conforming cases.  conformance checking can be used to judge the quality of discovered process models. 
however, more important, it can also be employed  as an enabling technology for 
auditing, six sigma, and compliance checking.  
model enhancement  
the third type of process mining also uses a model and an event log as input. however, 
now the model is improved or extended. for example, f igure 2 illustrates how a process 
model can be extended  using  timestamp information in the event log. timestamps of 
causally related events can be used  to measure durations  between two subsequent  
activities. for example, analysis may show that it takes on average 21 days to make a 
decision after checking the ticket.  this information can be used to show bottlenecks and 
predict remaining flow  times for running cases .  
if the event log contains information about resources, it is also possible to discover roles, 
work distribution mechanisms, and resource characteristics. additional event and case 
attributes can also be used to learn decision rules explaining the choices made in the 
process.  for example, one may learn that cases that are thoroughly checked by sue 
tend to be rejected.  
more information about process mining (slides, articles, software, example logs, etc.) 
can be obtained from www.processmining.org . 
process mining manifesto << start text box>>  
the growing interest in log -based process analysis motivated the establishment of the 
ieee task force o n process minin g in 1999 ( http://www.win.tue.nl/ieeetfpm/ ). the g oal 
of this task force is to promote the research, development, education, and understanding 
of process mining. members of the task force include representatives of more than a 
dozen commercial software vendors (e.g., pallas athena, software ag, futura pro cess 
intelligence, hp, ibm, fujitsu, infosys, and fluxicon), ten consultancy firms (e.g., 
gartner and deloitte) , and over twenty universities.  
recently, the task force released a process mining m anifesto  describing six guiding 
principles  and eleven challenges . the manifesto is supported by 53 organizations and 
77 process mining experts contributed to it . the active contributions from end -users, tool 
vendors, consultants, analysts, and researchers illustrate the growing significance of 
process mining as a bridge between bi and bpm.  
the guiding principles in the manifesto describe best practices in process mining. for 
example, the fourth guiding principle states that “events should be related to model 
elements”. this principle emphasizes the importance of relating the event log to the 
model. as illustrated by figure 2, process discovery is just the starting point for process analysis and improvement.  after relating events to model elements, it is possible to 
replay  the event log on the model. replay may  be used to reveal discrepancies between 
an event log and a model, e.g., some events in the log may be  impossible acco rding to 
the model . timestamps in the event log can be used to analyze the temporal behavior. 
for example, b ottlenecks identified during r elay may be used for reengineering purposes 
or for making predictions about currently running cases.  
despite the applicability of existing process mining techniques  and tools , there are still 
many challenging open problems . the manifesto lists eleven challenges.  one example  
is “dealing with concept drift in process m ining ”. this challenge refers to the problem 
that processes may change over time due to periodic/seasonal changes (“in december 
there is more demand”), changing economic conditions, or new laws and regulations. 
such changes may significantly impact the performance of a process. therefore, it  is 
vital to detect and analyze concept drift . 
the manifesto describes the guiding principles and challenges in detail and can be 
obtained from http://ww w.win.tue.nl/ieeetfpm/ . 
google maps for business processes  
process mining is an importan t tool for modern organizations that need to manage non -
trivial operational processes. on the one hand, there is an incredible growth of event 
data. on the other hand, processes and  information need to be aligned perfectly in order 
to meet requirements related to compliance, efficiency, and customer service.  process 
mining technique s can help to achieve such goals.  
the principles and challenges described in the manifesto illustrate  that process mining is 
a new and exciting technology. the ultimate goal is to provide organizations with 
“google maps functionality ” for their operational business processes. at any point in 
time, there should be an up -to-date map for each process. such process maps  must  be 
tailored towards the intended use. it should be possible to seamlessly zoom in and out . 
when zooming out less important activities and paths should disappear or amalgamate 
into aggregate nodes like in google maps. it should also be possible to project real -time 
information on such process maps. this way, information systems can  visualize “traffic 
jams” in processes  and suggest alternative routes for delayed cases.  
unlike traditional approaches the goal is not to const ruct a single static model. process 
mining techniques can be used to dynamically generate process maps based on the 
most recent data and tailored towards the questions that need to be answered.  
wil van der aalst  is a professor of information systems at ein dhoven university of 
technology (the netherlands) and queensland university of technology (australia).  
contact him at w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tue.nl  