petri nets at tu/e
introduction
the architecture of information systems (ais) research group at eindhoven
university of technology (tu/e) investigates methods, techniques and tools for
the design and analysis of process-aware information systems (pais), i.e., sys-
tems that support business processes (workows) inside and between organi-
zations. we are not only interested in these information systems and their
architecture, but also model and analyze the business processes and organiza-
tions they support. we use petri nets for the modeling, analysis, discovery, and
enactment of processes.
our mission is to be one of the worldwide leading research groups in process
modeling and analysis ,process mining , and pais technology . we aim at results
that are highly original and applicable in real-life situations. our motto is
\process technology that works".
the architecture of information systems (ais) at tu/e group is chaired
by prof.dr.ir. wil van der aalst. the permanent sta of ais involved in re-
search currently consists of dr.ir. boudewijn van dongen, prof.dr. kees van hee,
prof.dr.ir. wim nuijten, dr.msc. natalia sidorova, and dr.ir. eric verbeek. un-
til recently dr. marc voorhoeve was also in our group but, sadly, he passed
away on 7-10-2011. there are about eight postdocs and seven phd's. postdocs
very active in the petri net area are dr. christian stahl, dr. dirk fahland, dr.
michael westergaard, and dr. jan martijn van der werf.
the group got the highest possible ranking in the last evaluation of dutch
computer science research (5-5-5-5-5). the work is highly cited and the soft-
ware tools (co-)developed by the group (e.g., prom, declare, cpn tools, and
yawl) are widely known and used.
history and scope of research
until 2004 the petri net group at eindhoven university of technology (tu/e)
was named specication and modeling of information systems (smis). in 2004
the group was renamed to architecture of information systems (ais). within
the smis/ais group there is a long-standing tradition in modeling and ana-
lyzing process-aware information system (paiss) using petri nets . a pais is
a software system that manages and executes operational processes involving
people, applications, and/or information sources on the basis of process mod-
els. example paiss are workow management systems, case-handling systems,
middleware platforms, enterprise information systems, etc.
1in the nineties the group worked on exspect (executable specication tool,
www.exspect.com ), a specication language and corresponding toolset based
on petri nets extended with data, time, and hierarchy. exspect has been used
to specify a wide variety of systems (from entire supply chains to embedded
software in e.g. copiers) and its simulation engine turned out to be very useful
in all kinds of practical situations. in the late nineties the development moved
to bakkenist consultancy (now part of deloitte), because most of the research
challenges related to the execution and simulation of high-level petri nets had
been addressed. despite several successful applications, deloitte discontinued
the development of exspect. however, the simulation engine of exspect is
still being used in the most widely used business process modeling tool in the
netherlands: protos of pallas athena.
cpn tools is by far the most widely used petri-net tool having more than
10,000 licenses in 150 countries. the cpn group at aarhus university in den-
mark has developed and supported cpn tools (group of kurt jensen). however,
in 2010, cpn tools was transferred to our group. michael westergaard, who
moved to tu/e around the same period, plays a key role in the development
and support of cpn tools. in the autumn of 2010, we released version 3.0. the
current version is 3.2.
although tools such as exspect and cpn tools are highly generic and can
be applied to a variety of systems and processes (e.g., embedded systems, sup-
ply chains, etc.), the main focus since the late nineties has been on paiss (in
particular workow management systems). the ais group was among the rst
groups to formalize workow concepts in a systematic manner. van der aalst
introduced the so-called workflow nets (wf-nets) and a correctness criterion
called soundness . wf-nets are a subclass of petri nets tailored towards workow
modeling and analysis. the modeling of wf-nets and the analysis of sound-
ness are supported by tools such as woan and yasper. wf-nets and soundness
have been widely adopted within the academic community and these techniques
are increasingly used in all kinds of commercial software products (protos, ibm
websphere, etc.). members of the ais group worked on alternative soundness
notions, verication techniques, and also applied these techniques to large sets
of real-life process models. for example, we showed that more than 20 percent
of the 600 process models in sap's well-known reference model contain errors.
in september 2006, van der aalst moved from the information systems
group in the department of industrial engineering & innovation sciences (ieis)
to the ais group. because of the move of van der aalst, verbeek, and van
dongen from ieis to ais, the focus of ais was extended to also include process
mining. to explain the relation between process mining and the earlier work of
ais on petri nets and workow verication, let us consider figure 1. this gure
shows the role of (process) models in the pais context. process models can be
used to describe and analyze processes and to specify, congure, or implement
information systems.
the left-hand-side of figure 1 shows some examples of design-time analysis :
validation (i.e., testing whether the process behaves as expected), verication ,
(i.e., establishing the correctness of a process denition), and traditional (i.e.,
non-log based) performance analysis (e.g., using simulation to evaluate the abil-
ity to meet requirements with respect to throughput times, service levels, and
resource utilization).
traditionally, most of ais's research focused on design-time analysis. how-models
analyzes
discoveryrecords 
events, e.g., 
messages, 
transactions, 
etc.specifies
configures
implements
analyzessupports/
controls
extensionconformancepeople machines
organizationscomponentsbusiness processes
verification
performance 
analysisvalidationfigure 1: positioning ais's research.
ever, more and more information about (business) processes is recorded by infor-
mation systems in the form of so-called \event logs". it systems are becoming
more and more intertwined with these processes, resulting in an \explosion" of
available data that can be used for analysis purposes. the goal of process mining
is to extract process-related information from event logs, e.g., to automatically
discover a process model by observing events recorded by some information
system. however, process mining is not limited to discovery and also includes
conformance checking (investigating whether reality conforms to a given model
and vice versa) and extension (augmenting an existing model with additional
insights extracted from some event log).
since 2006, ais is also focusing on process mining. in fact, van der aalst
and his colleagues established process mining as a research eld and developed
the inuential prom framework. currently, process mining is seen as one of the
main innovations in business process management, and the ideas are rapidly
being incorporated in commercial products (bpm jone, futura reect, aris
ppm, etc.). the combination of knowledge about pais technology, process
modeling notations, petri net theory, process verication, and data mining turns
out to be an excellent basis for process mining research. classical techniques in
the eld of data mining and the so-called business intelligence (bi) tools used
in industry do not explicitly focus on process models. as a result, the scope
is limited to data dependencies and performance measurements. ais's unique
set of capabilities can be used to bridge the gap between process modeling and
analysis on the one hand and data mining and bi on the other. this provides
an ideal starting point for scientic and technological breakthroughs in process
mining.
research lines
current ais research concentrates on formalisms for modeling and methods to
discover and analyze models. on the one hand formal methods are being used,
e.g., the group has a long tradition in petri-net modeling and analysis. on the
other hand, we are interested in modeling languages widely used in industry(epcs, uml, bpmn, bpel, etc.). in contrast to many other research groups
in this area, we do not accept a model as an objective starting point, i.e.,
we also try to discover process models through process mining and check the
conformance of models based on reality.
the goal for the next ve years is to further develop the main three research
lines of ais:
research line 1: process modeling/analysis. while various types
of process notations are used in industry, formal models such as petri
nets are more suitable for analysis purposes. driven by questions from
the other two research lines (process mining and pais technology), par-
ticular models (e.g., wf-nets, wf-nets with data and resources, history-
dependent nets, open nets, nested nets, etc.) are used to answer questions
related to correctness and performance. the main techniques that are
used are model checking, structural techniques (invariants, etc.), simula-
tion, and markov (decision) processes. moreover, quite some eorts are
made to translate industry standards and proprietary languages (epcs,
uml, bpmn, bpel, etc.) to formal models (typically petri nets). one
of the main goals in research line 1 is to further improve verication
techniques to check various properties such as soundness, data/resource
soundness, accordance, controllability, and selected temporal properties.
here there is a need for more empirical research, i.e., analyzing large
repositories of models like the sap reference model. moreover, pattern-
based approaches can be used for correctness-by-design. another goal is
to develop innovative simulation approaches that better reect reality and
that can be used in an operational setting while using process mining re-
sults. a prerequisite for the above analysis approaches is the consistent
integration of the dierent perspectives.
research line 2: process mining. process mining techniques are used
to extract process-related information from event logs, e.g., to automat-
ically discover models, check conformance, and augment existing models
with additional insights extracted from some event log. the main dif-
ference with research line 1 is that event logs play a central role (rather
than predened process models). one goal is to signicantly improve the
state-of-the-art in process discovery . a particular challenge is to deal with
less structured processes and incomplete event logs. for this we want to
improve our approaches based on region theory, fuzzy models, and genetic
mining. another goal is to advance the state-of-the-art in conformance
checking , e.g., by rening our replay strategies and to allow for on-the-
y checking. related is the challenge to predict problems , i.e., provide
warnings based on historic information (e.g., a case will be late or an er-
ror is likely to occur). to achieve this, we plan to use pattern analysis,
correlation analysis, and trace clustering.
research line 3: pais technology. paiss are used to manage and ex-
ecute operational processes involving people, applications, and/or informa-
tion sources. examples are wfm (workow management), bpm (busi-
ness process management), and erp (enterprise resource planning) sys-
tems. increasingly, these systems are driven by models (connection to
research line 1) and produce high-quality event logs (connection to re-process 
miningpais 
technology
process 
modeling/
analysis
declarefigure 2: the three main research areas and the most relevant tools.
search line 2). we are interested in the artifacts used and produced by
these systems (i.e., models and logs) as these are essential for testing the
techniques developed in the two other research lines. for example, it is
interesting to convert and verify process models expressed in some partic-
ular industry language. this enables empirical research and triggers new
questions. the same holds of course for event logs. we are also studying
pais architectures . note that service-orientation plays an important role
here and this new architectural style poses new research questions. al-
though most paiss are used in a business setting (governments, banks,
insurance companies, supply chains, etc.), we are also interested in scien-
tic computing and grid architectures. note that the \process of process
mining" can be seen as a scientic workow. moreover, for large scale pro-
cess mining experiments, we are using our own grid with a dedicated grid
architecture. in research line 3 we heavily rely on the workow patterns.
this helps us to understand and characterize paiss.
the three research lines are interconnected in various ways. paiss are
process-aware, use models, and provide for event logs. these models and logs
can be analyzed using the techniques developed in research line 1 and research
line 2. moreover, these analysis results can be used by the pais, e.g., for rec-
ommendations, predictions, and diagnosis.
tooling
tools play a crucial role in the development of the three research lines. as
figure 2 shows, prom is the central tool for realizing and evaluating our ideas.
new techniques related to process mining and process modeling/analysis will be
realized in prom. prom subsumes the functionality of woan (workow veri-
cation) and yasper (workow modeling and analysis). other relevant tools are
cpn tools ,declare and yawl . these are three open-source workow man-agement systems that are (partly) developed within ais. declare is a system
aiming at more exibility using a declarative style of modeling grounded in tem-
poral logic. yawl is a highly expressive workow management system based
on the workow patterns and a result of our joint research with qut. both
declare and yawl are tightly connected to prom, e.g., prom can analyze the
logs and models of yawl and declare. figure 2 also mentions some software
systems not developed within ais. in our teaching and research we are heavily
using cpn tools . cpn tools is a standard petri net tool for modeling and
analyzing high-level nets. we are mainly using cpn tools for simulation and
conceptualizing ideas. bpmjoneof pallas athena and websphere of ibm are
two commercial paiss we are frequently using. both bpm jone and websphere
have adopted results from our research and are interesting commercial platforms
for testing research ideas.
in out view, tools such as prom, cpn tools, and declare are essential for
conducting relevant research. we welcome other groups to collaborate with us
on the further development of these tools!
for more information, we refer to:
ais: www.win.tue.nl/ais/
process mining and prom: www.processmining.org
cpn tools: www.cpntools.org
declare: www.win.tue.nl/declare/