deﬁnition and validation of process mining use cases
irina ailenei1, anne rozinat2, albert eckert3, and wil van der aalst1
1eindhoven university of technology, p.o. box 513, nl-5600 mb, eindhoven, the
netherlands. i.m.ailenei@student.tue.nl, w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tue.nl
2fluxicon process laboratories. anne@fluxicon.com
3siemens ag, corporate technology, munich, germany. albert.eckert@siemens.com
abstract. process mining is an emerging topic in the bpm marketplace. re-
cently, several (commercial) software solutions have become available. due to
the lack of an evaluation framework, it is very difﬁcult for potential users to as-
sess the strengths and weaknesses of these process mining tools. as the ﬁrst step
towards such an evaluation framework, we developed a set of process mining use
cases and validated these use cases by means of expert interviews and a survey.
we present the list of use cases and discuss the insights from our empirical valida-
tion. these use cases will then form the basis for a detailed evaluation of current
process mining tools on the market.
keywords : business process intelligence, process mining, use cases, evaluation framework.
1 introduction
the area of process mining has attracted the attention of both researchers and practi-
tioners. as a consequence, a signiﬁcant number of algorithms and tools were developed.
for instance, the academic process mining tool prom version 5.2 contains more than
280 pluggable algorithms, developed to provide a wide range of functionalities and
techniques. additionally, commercial process mining tools have emerged on the mar-
ket and often use their own standards and naming. for a potential user, this situation
is quite confusing and it is difﬁcult to choose the most suitable process mining tool or
algorithm for the task at hand.
our goal is to develop an evaluation framework that can be used to assess the
strengths and weaknesses of different process mining tools. we will then apply this
evaluation framework to compare commercial process mining tools that are currently
available on the market. therefore, the main questions of this project are:
1. what are typical process mining use cases ?
2. which process mining tools are suitable for which use case?
asprocess mining tool we consider any software that is able to extract process
models from raw event logs (without having to manually create a model beforehand).
as process mining use cases we consider typical applications of process mining func-
tionality in a practical situation.
consider figure 1, which illustrates that the use of any process mining tool will be
carried out in a certain context. we can assume that the context of the person usingusercontext:- role, function- type of project- phase- industry- ...
process mining toolfunctionality:- process discovery- conformance checking- export as picture- ... use casesfig. 1. use cases for process mining may vary depending on the context
process mining has an inﬂuence on which type of functionality is considered most im-
portant. for example, the role or function a person fulﬁlls in their organization might
impact the type of analysis that the user is interested in (e.g., an auditor would be more
interested in checking the compliance of processes whereas a process analyst will be
mostly focused on process improvement). another example is the type of project: in a
process improvement project a user is likely to be more focused on diagnosing process
bottlenecks and inefﬁciencies whereas in an it re-implementation project the main goal
might be to extract the current processes in an executable process modeling language
such as bpmn. even within one project, process mining could be used in different
phases (e.g., as a quick-scan in the beginning of an improvement project or as a means
to validate the actual improvements at the end of the project).
in this paper, we address the ﬁrst question of the project by reporting on the devel-
opment of an evaluation framework by deﬁning and categorizing use cases for process
mining. to ensure that the list of use cases is as complete and as relevant as possible,
we validate these use cases by expert interviews with practitioners and a survey. during
the validation, we also capture information about the context of the user to ﬁnd out how
their role affects the importance they give to the different use cases. these use cases
will then form the basis for a detailed evaluation of current process mining tools in the
market. the deﬁnition of the evaluation criteria and the results obtained are, however,
outside the focus of this paper.
the remainder of the paper is organized as follows. section 2 discusses related
work. section 3 describes the approach that we followed to deﬁne and validate the
process mining use cases. section 4 introduces our list of process mining use cases
in detail. in section 5, we then describe how we validated these use cases through
expert interviews and a survey. finally, in section 6 we give an outlook on how we
are currently detailing and applying our evaluation framework for the assessment of
different commercial process mining tools.
2 related work
as process mining is an emerging topic, little work has been done on the systematic
identiﬁcation of use cases. lion’s share of process mining literature focuses on pro-
cess discovery. several authors describe how to evaluate discovered process models
[10, 4–6, 8, 7]. for example, in [8] an evaluation framework is deﬁned. the framework
provides an extended set of tests to judge the quality of process mining results. one ofthe problems is a lack of commonly agreed upon benchmark logs. this year’s business
processing intelligence challenge (bpic) aims to address this problem by providing a
reference log.
unlike the approaches aiming to judge the quality of the discovered process model
[4–6, 8, 7], we focus on the different functionalities related to process mining. clearly,
this extends beyond pure control-ﬂow discovery.
our approach to deﬁne and validate use cases is related to [9] (e.g., conducting
interviews with bpm experts). however, in [9] the focus is on business process model
abstraction rather than process mining. also related are the evaluations done in the
context of the workﬂow patterns [2].
3 approach
one of the challenges of our study was to decide which approach we are going to follow
in deﬁning and validating the list of use cases to be used for the tools evaluation. since
there was no standard reference for process mining use cases, we followed an inductive
approach, similar to the one described in [9], which aimed at deﬁning a list of process
mining functionalities needed in practice that is as complete and relevant as possible.
figure 2 illustrates the sequence of steps that constitute the approach we followed.
fig. 2. the four phases of the approach
literature study the purpose of the literature study was to get an overview about the
existing functionality available in the context of process mining. in order to do this,
we looked at the functionality provided by the process mining tool prom [1] and
focused our attention on academic articles about process mining techniques as well
as on marketing brochures and descriptions of a couple of commercial process min-
ing tools present on the web.
deﬁnition of use cases the next step was the deﬁnition of an initial list of process
mining use cases. we consider a use case to represent the use of a concrete pro-
cess mining functionality with the goal to obtain an independent and ﬁnal result.
therefore, actions performed before the actual analysis, like the import of the event
log or ﬁltering, are not included in our list. when deﬁning the list of use cases, we
used the classiﬁcation of process mining techniques described in [10]. figure 3 is
a simpler representation of this classiﬁcation and also shows our scope in relation
with the entire classiﬁcation. the deﬁnition of use cases is thus restricted to the
ofﬂine analysis and does not include any techniques that deal with prediction, de-
tection or recommendation. this limitation was introduced due to the inability ofevaluating the systems participating in the study in an online analysis environment.
the description and examples of each use case are introduced in section 4.
fig. 3. the project’s scope in the context of process mining
validation through interviews the great number of existing process mining tech-
niques and the lack of a standard list of use cases led to the need of validating
the deﬁned list. we started our validation phase by conducting a series of ten semi-
structured interviews with practitioners having process mining expertise. first, we
wanted to verify the understandability of the descriptions of the use cases by asking
them to provide examples with situations in which each use case would be useful.
second, the goal of the interviews was to validate the list of use cases by remov-
ing the use cases that the participants considered irrelevant, and by determining
whether there are use cases missing from the initial set. furthermore, we wanted
to ﬁnd out whether there are differences between the importance of each use case
for different categories of end users. one lesson learnt from the interviews was that
participants have the tendency of saying that all use cases are equally important. as
a result of this observation, we deviated from the approach described in [9], where
use cases were just classiﬁed as important or not important, and instead used the
sorting method for ranking the use cases based on their importance. the ﬁndings
of the interviews are presented in detail in section 5.1.
validation through survey distributing a survey among people familiar with the ﬁeld
of process mining was the most suitable method to collect a larger number of re-
sponses for the validation phase. in total, we obtained 47 responses. the main goals
of the survey were to capture the context of the respondents by asking for their role
and domain, get the use cases rankings, and ﬁnd out what additional functionality
not covered by the list of use cases is considered important and should be included
in our tool evaluation. the results of the survey are discussed in section 5.2.
the list of validated use cases will serve as a basis for a detailed evaluation of a
couple of commercial process mining systems. for this purpose, an evaluation frame-
work has been developed. this framework incorporates next to the description and the
example for each use case, also related assumptions and a set of acceptance criteria used
to decide whether the use case is supported or not by a tool.4 use cases
this section introduces the list of process mining use cases by providing a short de-
scription of each use case. a more complete presentation, containing in addition a prac-
tical example for every use case, is given in [3]. the use cases are grouped into the
categories described in [10]. section 4.1 contains use cases belonging to the process
discovery part, subsection 4.2 focuses on the conformance checking use cases, while
sections 4.3, 4.4, 4.5 present the use cases related to the organizational, the time, and
the case perspective.
4.1 discovery
the use cases belonging to this category are focused on the control ﬂow perspective of
the process. the user gets a clear understanding of the analyzed process by looking at
its structure, frequent behavior and at the percentages of cases following every discov-
ered path.
use case 1: structure of the process. determine the structure of an unknown process
or discover how a process looks like in practice.
use case 2: routing probabilities. get a deeper understanding of the process by look-
ing at the probabilities of following one path or another after a choice point.
use case 3: most frequent path in the process. discover what is the path in the pro-
cess that is followed by the highest percentage of cases.
use case 4: distribution of cases over paths. discover common and uncommon be-
havior in the process by looking at the distribution of cases over the possible paths in
the process.
4.2 conformance checking
this category consists of use cases which have the purpose of checking whether the
process has the intended behavior in practice. the use cases pertaining to this category
have in common that in order to execute them one needs an additional input besides
the event log of the process to be analyzed. this input may be a reference model of the
process or a rule which the discovered process has to be checked against.
use case 5: exceptions from the normal path. discover the outliers of the process by
looking at the exceptional behavior observed in practice.
use case 6: the degree in which the rules are obeyed. check whether the rules and
regulations related to the process are obeyed.
use case 7: compliance to the explicit model. compare the documented process
model with the real process as observed in the event log.
4.3 enhancement - extension - organizational perspective
the focus of the use cases included in this category is on the organizational analysis.
the outcome of executing these use cases provides the user with an insight in the issues
related to the resource perspective of the process.
use case 8: resources per task. discover the relation between resources and tasks.
use case 9: resources involved in a case. discover the group of resources involved insolving a particular case.
use case 10: work handovers. manage resource location or determine possible causes
for quality and time issues by looking at how work is transferred between resources.
use case 11: central employees. determine who the central resources for a process
are by analyzing the social network based on handovers of work.
4.4 enhancement - extension - time perspective
as performance-related insights are most valuable, most of the use cases related to
enhancement correspond to the time perspective.
use case 12: throughput time of cases. determine the time that passed since the start
of a case in process until its completion.
use case 13: slowest activities. discover potential time problems by looking at the
slowest activities in the process.
use case 14: longest waiting times. determine delays between activities by analyzing
the waiting times before each activity.
use case 15: cycles. learn whether additional delays occur in the process due to cycles.
use case 16: arrival rate of cases. determine the frequency with which new cases
arrive in the process.
use case 17: resource utilization rate. determine what are the utilization rates of the
resource i.e, measure the fraction of time that a resource is busy.
use case 18: time sequence of events. get a deeper understanding on the organization
of a process by looking at the time sequence of activities for a speciﬁc case. (e.g. gant-
graph for activities).
4.5 enhancement - extension - case perspective
the case perspective of the process is represented by a single use case.
use case 19: business rules. discover what are the process attributes that inﬂuence the
choice points and what are the conditions for following one branch or another.
5 validation of the use cases
the use cases were validated by conducting ten interviews (section 5.1) and by dis-
tributing a survey (section 5.2) among process mining users and experts.
5.1 interviews
we conducted in total ten interviews with process mining users and domain experts.
the interviews can be divided into two categories:(1) interviews aimed at gaining some
qualitative feedback on the understandability of the use cases and (2) interviews which
were focused on obtaining a ranking of the use cases based on their importance for the
interviewees and on identifying missing use cases.
(1) based on the feedback received from the ﬁrst type of interviews (in total: four)
two non-relevant use cases were removed from the list, the descriptions of a couple ofuse case were reﬁned and a short motivation was added for each remaining use case.
the two irrelevant use cases referred to the possibility of identifying the paths in the
process taking most time and to the possibility of visualizing the list of process attributes
stored in the event log. the aim of reﬁning the use case descriptions and of adding the
motivation dimension was to increase the understandability and clarity of what each use
case is about and what its practical purpose is.
(2) in the second type of interviews (in total: six) we asked the interviewees to
sort the list of cases in the order of their importance in practice and on discovering
any missing use cases. moreover, we were interested in gaining additional insights on
what are the functionalities that a process mining tool should provide to its users. these
interviews were structured in three parts. the ﬁrst part aimed at getting information
about the experience of the interviewee in the context of process mining and about the
added value that process mining brings to their work. secondly, the interviewees were
shown the list of use cases and were asked to assign to each use case a score from 1 to
19 based on its importance (1 being the most important). the last part of the interview
was meant to summarize the discussion, to learn about possible use cases missing from
the initial list and about additional functionality that interviewees consider useful in a
process mining tool. the complete summary of the outcomes of these six interviews
can be found in [3].
the six interviews we conducted were balanced from the point of view of the inter-
viewee’s role in the context of using process mining techniques. three of the persons
interviewed were process analysts and the other three were auditors. the second di-
mension we took into account when selecting the interviewees was the domain they
belong to. in this context we aimed at having a broader range of domains and therefore
we talked with people working in the banking industry, healthcare, public sector, and
business process consulting.
fig. 4. use cases ranking results from the interviews with process analysts and auditorsfigure 4 depicts the proﬁles of process analysts and auditors based on the use case
rankings collected from our interviews. on the x-axis we refer to use case numbers,
while the y-axis represents the averages of the scores the use cases were assigned during
the interviews. the graphic shows there are some differences in ranking the use cases
based on the proﬁle of the respondents. for instance, use case 12 (throughput time of
cases) is one of the most important use cases according to the process analysts group,
while the auditors consider this quite irrelevant in practice. the opposite holds for use
case 5 (exceptions from the normal path), which is ranked as highly important by the
auditors and less important by the process analysts.
furthermore, the top ﬁve and bottom ﬁve use cases were extracted for each category
of respondents (cf. table 1 and table 2). our expectations regarding the difference in
needs of people having different roles are conﬁrmed by comparing the top ﬁve use cases
for each category. the contents of the top rankings are quite different, except for two
use cases that are considered important by all: discovering the structure of a process
and looking at the distribution of cases over the paths in the process.
when comparing the rankings of the least interesting use cases, one can also iden-
tify some similarities. four use cases are common for both rankings. respondents, in-
dependent of their role, consider that determining the group of resources performing
a task and the group of resources involved in a case, as well as looking at the central
employees of a process and at the arrival rate of cases in the process are less relevant
use cases.
table 1. top 5 and bottom 5 use cases for process analysts
top 5 use cases bottom 5 use cases
u3. most frequent path in the process u8. resources per task
u1. structure of the process u11. central employees
u15. cycles u9. resources involved in a case
u12. throughput time of cases u5. exceptions from the normal path
u4. distribution of cases over paths u16. arrival rate of cases
u19. business rules
table 2. top 5 and bottom 5 use cases for auditors
top 5 use cases bottom 5 use cases
u1. structure of the process u10. work handovers
u7. compliance to the explicit model u11. central employees
u4. distribution of cases over paths u8. resources per task
u2. routing probabilities u17. resource utilization rate
u5. exceptions from the normal path u9. resources involved in a case
u16. arrival rate of cases
5.2 survey
as a next step, we designed and distributed a survey to collect a larger number of
responses. the survey contained all the questions addressed during the interviews, butalso additional ones, which serve the purpose of capturing more detailed information
about the end user’s need in terms of process mining functionality. the contents of the
survey and the complete results are given in [3].
this section presents the results obtained for a selection of the questions asked. we
focus on the role and activity domain of the respondents, the ranking of the use cases,
the identiﬁcation of missing use cases and the possible functionality important for a
process mining tool but not covered in the list of use cases.
from this survey, we received 47 responses. although this number of responses is
not enough to obtain statistically signiﬁcant results, nor to generalize them, the survey
results can provide useful qualitative feedback to validate our use cases. the high-
est percentages of responses we received are from people working in domains like
academia (43%, 20 responses), information technology(21%, 10 responses), business
process management consulting (19%, 9 responses), and banking (6%, 3 responses).
the distribution over the roles shows a high percentage of researchers (51%, 24 re-
sponses), followed by process analysts (28%, 13 responses), process managers (9%, 4
responses), and consultants (6%, 3 responses).
the scores obtained by each use case based on the rankings were computed both
over all responses and based on the role of the respondent. the score of a use case is
the average of all scores registered from all rankings of the respondents belonging to
the same role (the lower the score the more important is the use case). based on these
scores, we generated the graph depicted in figure 5, which presents the proﬁles of the
four most representative roles among the respondents.
fig. 5. use cases ranking results based on respondents roles
again, the results conﬁrmed our expectation that the way users rank the use cases
differs based on the role they have. it is interesting to see that use case 6 (the degree in
which rules are obeyed) is considered medium important by researchers, process ana-
lysts and process managers while consultants view it as an essential use case. the sameobservation holds for use case 17 (resource utilization rates); process managers view
it as a highly relevant use case, while the respondents belonging to the other categories
have a different opinion.
however, similarities in the ranking are also quite frequent. for instance, use case
1 (structure of the process) is graded as one of the most important use cases by all the
roles. similarly, use cases 3 (most frequent path in the process) and 7 (compliance to
the explicit model) are present in the tops of all rankings. the lower parts of the four
rankings also share common use cases. examples are use case 11 (central employees)
and use case 16 (arrival rate of cases).
the rankings obtained for the use cases were also grouped based on the domains of
activity of the respondents. the results show few differences between the three domains
considered (academia, information technology and business process management con-
sulting). the proﬁles of the domains are shown in [3].
table 3 presents the results of rankings of the use cases based on the survey re-
sponses. we make the distinction between use cases relevant for all the roles, use cases
less relevant for all the roles and use cases relevant only for some speciﬁc roles. this
distinction was made by considering relevant the top nine use cases from the aggregated
rankings of each role and less relevant the remaining ten use cases.
four use cases (u1, u3, u4, and u7) are considered important by all the groups of
respondents, while six use cases (u8, u9, u10, u14, u16, and u18) are rated as less
important by all the groups. it is interesting to note that there are two use cases (u13
and u17) that are relevant for only one of the categories of respondents. the opposite
holds for use cases u5, u6, u12, and u15, which resulted to be important for three out
of the four categories of respondents.
table 3. aggregated results survey
uses case relevant for all roles use cases less relevant for all roles
u1. structure of the process u8. resources per task
u3. most frequent path in the process u9. resources involved in a case
u4. distribution of cases over paths u10. work handovers
u7. compliance to the explicit model u14. longest waiting times
u16. arrival rate of cases
u18. time sequence of events
use case relevant for
u2. routing probabilities researchers, pr managers, consultants
u5. exceptions from the normal path researchers, pr analysts, consultants
u6. the degree in which the rules are obeyed researchers, pr analysts, consultants
u12. throughput time of cases researchers, pr analysts, pr managers
u13. slowest activities consultants
u15. cycles researchers, pr analysts, pr managers, consultants
u17. resource utilization rate pr managers
u19. business rules pr analysts, pr managersfor the question asking whether there are any missing use cases, 58% of the re-
spondents answered no, while 42% suggest new use cases. among these suggestions,
the measurement of different kpis (cost, quality, ﬂexibility, etc), the creation of a sim-
ulation model, and the online analysis of an event log with the purpose of making pre-
dictions were mentioned. since our scope is limited to the process mining techniques
that perform an ofﬂine analysis of processes and the last two indications we received
are related to the online type of analysis, they are not considered for new use cases. the
suggestion related to the kpis measurement does however ﬁt in our scope, but at the
moment is too vague and general to be transformed in a testable use case.
the answers regarding the additional functionalities that a process mining system
should offer to its users can be grouped into the following categories: input and output
capabilities, the ability to ﬁlter and cluster data, the integration with external systems
like databases, bpm tools, erp, crm, etc, animation capabilities, and the support for
large input event logs. this information will be used as basis for the extended evaluation
of the process mining tools in the following phases of the project.
5.3 conclusions of the validation phase
the use cases ranking results derived from the survey are in line with the ones resulted
from the interviews, in the sense that respondents having different roles have different
needs in terms of process mining functionality. this is reﬂected in the scores assigned
to the use cases. another similarity between the results of the two validation steps is the
fact that use case 1 (structure of the process) was considered overall the most important
one, while use cases 11 (central employees) and 16 (arrival rate of cases) are the least
signiﬁcant ones.
based on the feedback received during the validation phase of our approach, we
removed two irrelevant use cases, we rephrased all the use cases descriptions that were
unclear, and we obtained a classiﬁcation of use cases based on their importance for
different roles.
the outcome of the interviews and survey was the validated list of process mining
use cases. by validated, we mean use cases properly formulated, understandable, and
corresponding to the needs of process mining users. additional developments of the use
cases needed for the practical tool evaluation are described in section 6.
6 future work
in this paper we presented the method we used to deﬁne and validate a list of process
mining use cases. we employed an exploratory approach to collect a comprehensive
set of process mining functionalities needed in practice. we started by looking at the
literature in the domain of process mining and the functionality available in prom. the
next step was the deﬁnition of a set of use cases grouped according to the classiﬁcation
of process mining techniques given in [10]. we then validated the use cases by means
of ten semi-structured interviews with domain experts and process mining users and by
a survey.the outcome of this study, namely the validated list of process mining use cases, is
a part of a broader project that aims at evaluating a set of commercial process mining
systems. the evaluation is done by judging whether a system provides support for each
of the use cases in the list.
to do this, the use cases are currently further reﬁned by assumptions and detailed
acceptance criteria to allow for an unambiguous and repeatable evaluation. for example,
use case 1 (structure of the process) will be tested based on detailed acceptance criteria
that determine which kinds of behavioral patterns [2] can be discovered by the tool.
additional to the complete use cases framework, we developed a set of benchmark
event logs as part of our experimental setup for the evaluation.
so far we used our framework to evaluate two process mining tools: futura reﬂect
by futura process inteligence and processanalyzer by qpr. based on the use cases
we created a comprehensive set of event logs to test the functionality. our initial ﬁnd-
ings show that the approach indeed reveals relevant strengths and weaknesses of the
different tools. currently, we are working on the evaluation of two other systems: aris
performance process manager (ppm) by software ag and flow by fourspark.
acknowledgements . we want to thank the practitioners who were willing to support
us in an expert interview and everyone who took the time to ﬁll out our survey.
references
1. process mining. http://www.processmining.org/.
2. w.m.p. van der aalst, a.h.m. ter hofstede, b. kiepuszewski, and a.p. barros. workﬂow
patterns. distributed and parallel databases , 14(1):5–51, 2003.
3. i. ailenei, a. rozinat, a. eckert, and w.m.p. van der aalst. towards an evaluation frame-
work for process mining systems. technical report bpm center report bpm-11-13, bpm-
center.org, 2011.
4. a.k. alves de medeiros and c.w. g ¨unther. process mining: using cpn tools to create test
logs for mining algorithms. proceedings of the sixth workshop and tutorial on practical
use of coloured petri nets and the cpn tools , 2005.
5. s. goedertier, d. martens, j. vanthienen, and b. baesens. robust process discovery with
artiﬁcial negative events. journal of machine learning research , 10:1305–1340, 2009.
6. j. munoz-gama and j. carmona. a fresh look at precision in process conformance. in
r. hull, j. mendling, and s. tai, editors, business process management (bpm 2010) , volume
6336, pages 211–226, 2010.
7. a. rozinat and w.m.p. van der aalst. conformance checking of processes based on moni-
toring real behavior. information systems , 33(1):64–95, 2008.
8. a. rozinat, a.k. alves de medeiros, c.w. g ¨unther, a.j.m.m. weijters, and w.m.p. van der
aalst. the need for a process mining evaluation framework in research and practice. in
m. castellanos, j. mendling, and b. weber, editors, informal proceedings of the interna-
tional workshop on business process intelligence (bpi 2007) , pages 73–78. qut, brisbane,
australia, 2007.
9. s. smirnov, h.a. reijers, t. nugteren, and m. weske. business process model abstraction:
theory and practice. technical report, hasso plattner institute postdam, 2010.
10. w.m.p. van der aalst. process mining - discovery, conformance and enhancement of busi-
ness processes . springer, 2011.