analysis of patient treatment procedures
r.p. jagadeesh chandra bose1;2and wil m.p. van der aalst1
1eindhoven university of technology, the netherlands
2philips healthcare, veenpluis 5{6, best, the netherlands
{j.c.b.rantham.prabhakara,w.m.p.v.d.aalst}@tue.nl
abstract. a real-life event log, taken from a dutch academic hos-
pital, provided for the bpi challenge is analyzed using process mining
techniques. the log contains events related to treatment and diagnosis
steps for patients diagnosed with cancer. given the heterogeneous nature
of these cases, we rst demonstrate that it is possible to create more ho-
mogeneous subsets of cases (e.g., patients having a particular type of
cancer that need to be treated urgently). such preprocessing is crucial
given the variation and variability found in the event log. the discovered
homogeneous subsets are analyzed using state-of-the-art process mining
approaches. more specically, we report on the ndings discovered using
enhanced fuzzy mining and trace alignment . a dedicated preprocessing
prom plug-in was developed for this challenge. the analysis was done
using recent, but pre-existing, prom plug-ins. the high-level view of our
approach is depicted in fig. 1. using this approach we are able to uncover
many interesting ndings that could be used to improve the underlying
care processes.
fig. 1. overview of the approach followed.
1 preprocessing: dissecting the event log
process mining results are aected by the heterogeneity in event logs, e.g., the
discovered control-ow models can be spaghetti-like. the event log contains rich
information stored as attributes both at the event level and at the case level.
we exploit this information and propose ve perspectives for preprocessing that
can be used in creating more homogenous subsets of cases. we mention three of
the ve perspectives in this paper.
{diagnosis perspective: each case contains a few attributes that provide in-
formation on the illness the patient is diagnosed with. these attributes can
be broadly classied into two categories (i) diagnosis code and (ii) diagnosis.
each case may contain up to 16 attributes of each type. one can lter the
event log based on a particular value for any of the diagnosis codes or diagnosis
attributes or a combination of them.
{organizational perspective: the `org:group' attribute of each event captures
the department/lab where the activity corresponding to the event was per-
formed. continuous sequence of activities executed in a department/lab can2 r.p.j.c. bose and w.m.p. van der aalst
be considered as a notion of artifacts. we propose the transformation of the
original log into an abstraction log where the activities correspond to the orga-
nization names. each continuous sequence of one or more events pertaining to
the same organization in the process instance of the original log is replaced by
a single event with the organization name as its activity. at the same time, we
create one sub-log for each organization whose process instances correspond
to the replaced sequence of events. the process of transformation is illustrated
in fig. 2.
eventgeneral lab
clinical chemistry
pathology radiology
(a) original case
gprgg=general lab
clinical chemistryp=path
ologyr=radi
ology
event (b) transformed case and sub-log traces
fig. 2. transformation of the original log into an abstraction log using the notion of
artifacts on the organizational perspective.
{urgent and non-urgent cases: the event log contains certain activities that
are classied as urgent. ordinary counterparts to such activities also exist.
this indicates that certain cases (patients) are considered as emergency cases
and are treated in an expedited manner. this enables the partitioning of a log
into two categories: urgent and non-urgent cases.
2 analysis
we focus on the control-ow and process diagnostics aspects and use the en-
hanced fuzzy miner plugin (to mine hierarchical workow models) for control-
ow analysis, and the `trace alignment with guide tree' plugin for process
diagnostics. the control-ow model mined using the organizational perspective
creates the ow of patients across dierent departments/labs. each department
can be seamlessly zoomed in to view the sub-process for that department. our
analysis revealed that the processes are in fact simple and sequential. trace align-
ment enables the inspection of event logs by grouping and aligning the traces .
trace alignment can be used to explore the process in the early stages of anal-
ysis and to answer specic questions in later stages of analysis, e.g., are there
common patterns of execution?, are there any anomalies?, are there any dis-
tinguishing aspects with respect to the treatment procedures followed among
cases?, etc. based on trace alignment, we noticed that not only are the treat-
ment procedures simple and sequential but also the cases share a lot in common
with very little deviations from the main path. the reader is referred to [1] for
a comprehensive report on the approach, analysis, and results.
references
1. bose, r.p.j.c., van der aalst, w.m.p.: analysis of patient treatment proce-
dures: the bpi challenge case study. technical report bpm-11-18, bpm-
center.org (2011) http://bpmcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/reports/2011/
bpm-11-18.pdf .