process mining put into context
wil m.p. van der aalst1;2and schahram dustdar3
1eindhoven university of technology
2queensland university of technology
3technical university of vienna
abstract. process mining techniques can be used to discover and ana-
lyze business processes based on raw event data. this article rst summa-
rizes guiding principles and challenges taken from the recently released
process mining manifesto. next, the authors argue that the context in
which events occur should be taken into account when analyzing pro-
cesses. contextualized event data can be used to extend the scope of
process mining and improve the quality of analysis results.
process mining is an emerging research discipline that sits between computa-
tional intelligence and data mining on the one hand, and process modeling and
analysis on the other hand [2]. starting point for process mining is an event log .
all process mining techniques assume that it is possible to sequentially record
events such that each event refers to an activity (i.e., a well-dened step in the
process) and is related to a particular case (i.e., a process instance). event logs
may store additional information such as the resource (i.e., person or device)
executing or initiating an activity, the timestamp of an event, or data elements
recorded with an event (e.g., the size of an order). event logs can be used to dis-
cover, monitor and improve processes based on facts rather than ction. there
are three types of process mining.
{discovery : take an event log and produce a model without using any other
a-priori information. there are dozens of techniques to extract a process
model from raw event data. for example, the classical algorithm is able to
discover a petri net by identifying basic process patterns in an event log [3].
for many organizations it is surprising to see that existing techniques are
indeed able to discover real processes based on merely example executions
recorded in event logs. process discovery is often used as a starting point for
other types of analysis.
{conformance : an existing process model is compared with an event log of
the same process. the comparison shows where the real process deviates
from the modeled process. moreover, it is possible to quantify the level of
conformance and dierences can be diagnosed. conformance checking can
be used to check if reality, as recorded in the log, conforms to the model
and vice versa. there are various applications for this (compliance checking,
auditing, six-sigma, etc.) [2].{enhancement : take an event log and process model and extend or improve
the model using the observed events. whereas conformance checking mea-
sures the alignment between model and reality, this third type of process
mining aims at changing or extending the a-priori model. for instance, by
using timestamps in the event log one can extend the model to show bottle-
necks, service levels, throughput times, and frequencies [2].
over the last decade, event data have become readily available and process
mining techniques have matured. moreover, managements trends related to pro-
cess improvement (e.g., six sigma, tqm, cpi, and cpm) and compliance (sox,
bam, etc.) can benet from process mining. process mining has become one of
the \hot topics" in business process management (bpm) research and there is
considerable interest from industry in process mining. more and more software
vendors started adding process mining functionality to their tools.
ieee task force on process mining
the growing interest in log-based process analysis motivated the establish-
ment of the ieee task force on process mining . the goal of this task force
is to promote the research, development, education and understanding of
process mining. the task force was established in 2009 in the context of the
data mining technical committee of the computational intelligence soci-
ety of the ieee. members of the task force include representatives of more
than a dozen commercial software vendors (e.g., pallas athena, software
ag, futura process intelligence, hp, ibm, fujitsu, infosys, and fluxicon),
ten consultancy rms (e.g., gartner and deloitte) and over twenty univer-
sities.
concrete objectives of the task force are:
{to make end-users, developers, consultants, business managers,
and researchers aware of the state-of-the-art in process mining,
{to promote the use of process mining techniques and tools
and stimulate new applications,
{to play a role in standardization eorts for logging event data,
{to organize tutorials, special sessions, workshops, panels, and
{to publish articles, books, videos, and special issues of journals.
see http://www.win.tue.nl/ieeetfpm/ for more information about the ac-
tivities of the task force.
process mining manifesto
the ieee task force on process mining recently released a manifesto describ-
ingguiding principles andchallenges [5]. the manifesto aims to increase the
visibility of process mining as a new tool to improve the (re)design, control, andsupport of operational business processes. it is intended to guide software devel-
opers, scientists, consultants, and end-users. as an introduction to the state-of-
the-art in process mining, we briey summarize the main ndings reported in
the manifesto [5].
table 1. six guiding principles [5]
event data should be treated as first-class citizens
gp1 events should be trustworthy , i.e., it should be safe to assume that the recorded
events actually happened and that the attributes of events are correct. event
logs should be complete , i.e., given a particular scope, no events may be miss-
ing. any recorded event should have well-dened semantics . moreover, the
event data should be safe in the sense that privacy and security concerns are
addressed when recording the event log.
log extraction should be driven by questions
gp2 without concrete questions it is very dicult to extract meaningful event
data. consider, for example, the thousands of tables in the database of an
erp system like sap. without questions one does not know where to start.
concurrency, choice and other basic control-flow constructs
should be supported
gp3 basic workow patterns supported by all mainstream languages (e.g., bpmn,
epcs, petri nets, bpel, and uml activity diagrams) are sequence ,parallel
routing (and-splits/joins), choice (xor-splits/joins), and loops . obviously,
these patterns should be supported by process mining techniques.
events should be related to model elements
gp4 conformance checking and enhancement heavily rely on the relationship be-
tween elements in the model and events in the log . this relationship may be
used to \replay" the event log on the model. replay can be used to reveal
discrepancies between event log and model (e.g., some events in the log are
not possible according to the model) and can be used to enrich the model
with additional information extracted from the event log (e.g., bottlenecks are
identied by using the timestamps in the event log).
models should be treated as purposeful abstractions of reality
gp5 a model derived from event data provides a view on reality . such a view should
serve as a purposeful abstraction of the behavior captured in the event log.
given an event log, there may be multiple views that are useful.
process mining should be a continuous process
gp6 given the dynamical nature of processes, it is not advisable to see process min-
ing as a one-time activity. the goal should not be to create a xed model, but
to breathe life into process models such that users and analysts are encouraged
to look at them on a daily basis.
guiding principles
as with any new technology, there are obvious mistakes that can be made when
applying process mining in real-life settings. therefore, the six guiding princi-ples listed in table 1 aim to prevent users/analysts from making such mistakes.
as an example, consider guiding principle gp4 : \events should be related to
model elements". it is a misconception that process mining is limited to control-
ow discovery, other perspectives such as the organizational perspective, the
time perspective, and the data perspective are equally important. however, the
control-ow perspective (i.e., the ordering of activities) serves as the layer con-
necting the dierent perspectives. therefore, it is important to relate events to
activities in the model. conformance checking and model enhancement heavily
rely on this relationship. after relating events to model elements, it is possi-
ble to \replay" the event log on the model [2]. replay may be used to reveal
discrepancies between an event log and a model, e.g., some events in the log
are not possible according to the model. techniques for conformance checking
quantify and diagnose such discrepancies. timestamps in the event log can be
used to analyze the temporal behavior during replay. time dierences between
causally related activities can be used to add average/expected waiting times to
the model. these examples illustrate the importance of guiding principle gp4;
the relation between events in the log and elements in the model serves as a
starting point for dierent types of analysis.
challenges
process mining is an important tool for modern organizations that need to man-
age non-trivial operational processes. on the one hand, there is an incredible
growth of event data. on the other hand, processes and information need to be
aligned perfectly in order to meet requirements related to compliance, eciency,
and customer service. despite the applicability of process mining there are still
important challenges that need to be addressed; these illustrate that process min-
ing is an emerging discipline. table 2 lists the eleven challenges described in the
process mining manifesto [5]. as an example consider challenge c4: \dealing
with concept drift". the term concept drift refers to the situation in which the
process is changing while being analyzed [4]. for instance, in the beginning of the
event log two activities may be concurrent whereas later in the log these activities
become sequential. processes may change due to periodic/seasonal changes (e.g.,
\in december there is more demand" or \on friday afternoon there are fewer
employees available") or due to changing conditions (e.g., \the market is getting
more competitive"). such changes impact processes and it is vital to detect and
analyze them. however, most process mining techniques analyze processes as if
they are in steady-state [4].
using a broader context
processes are executed in a particular context , but this context is often neglected
during analysis [6,7]. we distinguish four types of contexts: (a) instance context,
(b)process context, (c) social context, and (d) external context. existing process
mining techniques tend to use a rather narrow context, i.e., only the instancetable 2. some of the most important process mining challenges identied in the
manifesto [5]
finding, merging, and cleaning event data
c1 when extracting event data suitable for process mining several challenges need
to be addressed: data may be distributed over a variety of sources, event data
may be incomplete , an event log may contain outliers , logs may contain events
atdierent level of granularity , etc.
dealing with complex event logs having diverse characteristics
c2 event logs may have very dierent characteristics. some event logs may be
extremely large making them dicult to handle whereas other event logs are
so small that not enough data is available to make reliable conclusions.
creating representative benchmarks
c3 good benchmarks consisting of example data sets and representative quality
criteria are needed to compare and improve the various tools and algorithms.
dealing with concept drift
c4 the process may be changing while being analyzed. understanding such con-
cept drifts is of prime importance for the management of processes.
improving the representational bias used for process discovery
c5 a more careful and rened selection of the representational bias is needed to
ensure high-quality process mining results.
balancing between quality criteria such as fitness, simplicity, pre-
cision, and generalization
c6 there are four competing quality dimensions: (a) tness, (b) simplicity, (c)
precision, and (d) generalization. the challenge is to nd models that score
good in all four dimensions.
cross-organizational mining
c7 there are various use cases where event logs of multiple organizations are
available for analysis. some organizations work together to handle process in-
stances (e.g., supply chain partners) or organizations are executing essentially
the same process while sharing experiences, knowledge, or a common infras-
tructure. however, traditional process mining techniques typically consider one
event log in one organization.
providing operational support
c8 process mining is not restricted to o-line analysis and can also be used for
online operational support. three operational support activities can be iden-
tied: detect ,predict , and recommend .
combining process mining with other types of analysis
c9 the challenge is to combine automated process mining techniques with other
analysis approaches (optimization techniques, data mining, simulation, visual
analytics, etc.) to extract more insights from event data.
improving usability for non-experts
c10 the challenge is to hide the sophisticated process mining algorithms behind
user-friendly interfaces that automatically set parameters and suggest suitable
types of analysis.
improving understandability for non-experts
c11 the user may have problems understanding the output or is tempted to infer
incorrect conclusions. to avoid such problems, the results should be presented
using a suitable representation and the trustworthiness of the results should
always be clearly indicated.in isolation is considered. however, the handling of cases is inuenced by a
much broader context. therefore, analysis should not abstract from anything
not directly related to the individual instance.
instance 
context
e.g. size of order or 
type of customerprocess contextsocial contextexternal context
e.g., number of resources 
allocated to process, number 
of cases in progress
e.g., prioritization over different 
processes, social network, 
stress levels, internal 
competition 
e.g., weather, economic 
climate, seasonal effects, 
changes in legislationexpanding scope (more instances, 
more processes, etc.)a more direct relationship
between cause and effect
fig. 1. dierent levels of context data that may inuence the process that is analyzed
using process mining.
instance context
process instances (i.e., cases) may have various properties that inuence their
execution. consider for example the way a customer order is handled. the type
of customer placing the order may inuence the path the instance follows in the
process. the size of the order may inuence the type of shipping selected or
may inuence the transportation time. these properties can be directly related
to the individual process instance and we refer to them as the instance context .
typically, it is not dicult to discover relationships between the instance context
and the observed behavior of the case. for example, one could discover that an
activity is typically skipped for gold customers.
process context
a process may be instantiated many times, e.g., thousands of customer orders
are handled by the same process per year. yet, the corresponding process model
typically describes the life-cycle of one order in isolation. although interactions
among instances are not made explicit in such models, they may inuence eachother. for example, instances may compete for the same resources. an order
may be delayed by too much work-in-progress. looking at one instance in iso-
lation is not sucient for understanding the observed behavior. process mining
techniques should also consider the process context , e.g., the number of instances
being handled and the number of resources available for the process. for exam-
ple, when predicting the expected remaining ow time for a particular case one
should not only consider the instance context (e.g., the status of the order) but
also the process context (e.g., workload and resource availability).
social context
the process context considers all factors that can be directly related to a process
and its instances. however, people and organizations are typically not allocated
to a single process and may be involved in many dierent processes. moreover,
activities are executed by people that operate in a social network. friction be-
tween individuals may delay process instances and the speed at which people
work may vary due to circumstances that cannot be fully attributed to the pro-
cess being analyzed. all of these factors are referred to as the social context . this
context characterizes the way in which people work together within a particular
organization . today's process mining techniques tend to neglect the social con-
text even though it is clear that this context directly impacts the way that cases
are handled.
how people work
when using existing mainstream business process modeling languages, it is
only possible to describe human resources in a very naive manner. often
people are involved in many dierent processes, e.g., a manager, doctor, or
specialist may perform tasks in a wide range of processes. seen from the
viewpoint of a single process, these individuals may have a very low uti-
lization. however, a manager that needs to distribute her attention over
dozens of processes may easily become a bottleneck. however, when faced
with unacceptable delays the same manager can also decide to devote more
attention to the congested process and quickly resolve all problems. re-
lated is the so-called \yerkes-dodson law of arousal" that describes the
phenomenon that people work at dierent speeds based on their workload.
not just the distribution of attention over various processes matters: also
the workload-dependent working speeds determine the eective resource ca-
pacity for a particular process [1].
external context
theexternal context captures all factors that are part of an even wider ecosys-
tem that extends beyond the control sphere of the organization. for example,the weather, the economic climate, and changing regulations may inuence the
way that cases are being handled. the weather may inuence the workload, e.g.,
a storm or ooding may lead to increased volumes of insurance claims. chang-
ing oil prices may inuence the number of customer orders (e.g., the demand
for heating oil increases when prices drop). more stringent identity checks may
inuence the order in which social security related activities are being executed.
although the external context can have a dramatic impact on the process being
analyzed, it is dicult to select the relevant variables. learning the eect of the
external context is closely related to the identication of concept drift, e.g., a
process may gradually change due to external seasonal eects.
curse of dimensionality
the four types of context described in this article describe a continuum of factors
that may inuence a process. the factors closely related to a process instance
are easy to identify. however the social and external contexts are dicult to
capture in a few variables that can be used by process mining algorithms. more-
over, we are often faced with the so-called \curse of dimensionality", i.e., in
high-dimensional feature spaces enormous amounts of event data are required
to reliably learn the eect of contextual factors. therefore, additional research
is needed to \put process mining in context".
references
1. w.m.p. van der aalst. business process simulation revisited. in j. barjis, editor,
enterprise and organizational modeling and simulation , volume 63 of lecture notes
in business information processing , pages 1{14. springer-verlag, berlin, 2010.
2. w.m.p. van der aalst. process mining: discovery, conformance and enhancement
of business processes . springer-verlag, berlin, 2011.
3. w.m.p. van der aalst, a.j.m.m. weijters, and l. maruster. workow mining:
discovering process models from event logs. ieee transactions on knowledge
and data engineering , 16(9):1128{1142, 2004.
4. r.p. jagadeesh chandra bose, w.m.p. van der aalst, i. zliobaite, and m. pech-
enizkiy. handling concept drift in process mining. in h. mouratidis and c. rolland,
editors, international conference on advanced information systems engineering
(caise 2011) , volume 6741 of lecture notes in computer science , pages 391{405.
springer-verlag, berlin, 2011.
5. ieee task force on process mining. process mining manifesto. in bpm workshops ,
lecture notes in business information processing. springer-verlag, berlin, 2011.
6. k. ploesser, m. peleg, p. soer, m. rosemann, and j. recker. learning from
context to improve business processes. bptrends , pages 1{7, january 2009.
7. m. rosemann, j. recker, and c. flender. contextualisation of business processes.
international journal of business process integration and management , 3(1):47{60,
2008.