process mining applied to the bpi challenge 2012:
divide and conquer while discerning resources
r.p. jagadeesh chandra bose and wil m.p. van der aalst
eindhoven university of technology, the netherlands
{j.c.b.rantham.prabhakara,w.m.p.v.d.aalst}@tue.nl
abstract. a real-life event log, taken from a dutch nancial institute,
is analyzed using state-of-the-art process mining techniques. the log con-
tains events related to loan/overdraft applications of customers. we pro-
pose a hierarchical decomposition of the log into homogenous subsets of
cases based on characteristics such as the nal decision, oer, and suspi-
cion of fraud. these subsets are used to uncover interesting insights. the
event log in its entirety and the homogeneous subsets are analyzed us-
ing various process mining techniques. more specically, we analyze the
event log (a) on the resource perspective and the inuence of resources
on execution/turnaround times of activities, (b) on the control-ow per-
spective, and (c) for process diagnostics. a dedicated prom1plug-in
developed for this challenge allows for a comprehensive analysis of the
resource perspective. for the analysis of control-ow and process diag-
nostics, we use recent, but pre-existing, prom plug-ins. as the evaluation
shows, our mix of techniques is able to uncover many interesting ndings
and could be used to improve the underlying loan/overdraft application
handling process.
1 analysis
the event log provided for the challenge pertains to the application process for
a personal loan or overdraft within a dutch nancial institute. we analyze the
event log on three dierent aspects:
{resource perspective: understanding the correlations between resources, work-
loads, and processing speeds of cases is gaining attention in recent years in
process mining. we focus on the resource perspective and analyze whether
there are remarkable dierences between resources in their way of handling
applications and the nal outcome, in their execution and turnaround times
on dierent activities and their inuence on cycle times of cases. we have
developed a dedicated plug-in called resource work analysis in prom for this
analysis.
{control-ow perspective: control-ow discovery is one of the crucial steps in
understanding the real process execution behavior. the event log provided for
1prom is an extensible framework that provides a comprehensive set of tools/plug-
ins for the discovery and analysis of process models from event logs. see http:
//www.processmining.org for more information and to download prom.2 r.p.j.c. bose and w.m.p. van der aalst
the challenge is characterized by (i) heterogeneity of cases and (ii) concurrency
within the process . traditional process discovery algorithms have diculties in
dealing with these issues and generate spaghetti-like process models. we pro-
pose a hierarchical decomposition of the log based on homogeneity in cases and
apply the two-phase approach to process discovery [1] to mine comprehensible
process maps.
{process diagnostics: our third analysis is focussed on uncovering deviations
and other non-conforming behavior. we analyze the event log using trace
alignment [2], which has been proposed as a powerful technique for process
diagnostics. trace alignment can be used to explore the process in the early
stages of analysis and to answer specic questions in later stages of analysis.
2 results and conclusions
our analysis of the event log reveals that several resources perform multi-tasking,
i.e., work on simultaneous cases. such resources exhibit a negative inuence on
the execution times of activities leading to high turnaround times. furthermore,
several resources are often idle although an activity is available for execution.
this impacts the cycle time of cases. obviously, these are undesirable for cus-
tomers and the organization. from a control-ow perspective, at rst glance, the
event log may seem complex due to the heterogeneity in the log. however, a hier-
archical classication of the log based on the characteristics of the loan/overdraft
applications (e.g., nal decision, oer, suspicion of fraud, etc.) helps to simplify
analysis signicantly. analyzing homogenous subsets of cases in the event log
based on the classication reveals that the process is in fact rather simple. com-
prehensible process models and interesting diagnostic insights can be uncovered
using such a classication. for example, we uncovered several outliers in the
event log such as the approval of loan applications by automated resource and
execution of activities even after the cancellation and/or approval of loan appli-
cations. the reader is referred to [3] for a comprehensive report on the approach,
analysis, and results.
references
1. li, j., bose, r.p.j.c., van der aalst, w.m.p.: mining context-dependent and
interactive business process maps using execution patterns. in zur muehlen, m.,
su, j., eds.: bpm 2010 workshops. volume 66 of lnbip., springer-verlag (2011)
109{121
2. bose, r.p.j.c., van der aalst, w.m.p.: process diagnostics using trace alignment:
opportunities, issues, and challenges. information systems 37(2) (2012) 117{141
3. bose, r.p.j.c., van der aalst, w.m.p.: process mining applied to the bpi chal-
lenge 2012: divide and conquer while discerning resources. technical report
bpm-12-16, bpmcenter.org (2012) http://bpmcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/
reports/2012/bpm-12-16.pdf .