process mining in healthcare: data challenges
when answering frequently posed questions
r.s. mans1, w.m.p. van der aalst1, r.j.b. vanwersch1, a.j. moleman2
1department of information systems, eindhoven university of technology, p.o. box
513, nl-5600 mb, eindhoven, the netherlands.
r.s.mans,w.m.p.v.d.aalst,r.j.b.vanwersch@tue.nl
2academic medical center, university of amsterdam, department of quality
assurance and process innovation, amsterdam, the netherlands.
a.j.moleman@amc.uva.nl
abstract. in hospitals, huge amounts of data are recorded concerning
the diagnosis and treatments of patients. process mining can exploit such
data and provide an accurate view on healthcare processes and show how
they are really executed. in this paper, we describe the di ↵erent types of
event data found in current hospital information systems (hiss). based
on this classiﬁcation of available data, open problems and challenges are
discussed that need to be solved in order to increase the uptake of process
mining in healthcare.
key words: visualization, monitoring and mining healthcare processes
1 introduction
todays hospital information systems contain a wealth of data. typically, these
systems record information about (business) processes in the form of so-called
event logs. these logs can be used as input for process mining such that process-
related information can be extracted from these logs. in a healthcare context,
process mining can be used to provide insights into how healthcare processes are
really executed . people involved in these processes tend to have an ideal scenario
in mind, which in reality is only one of the many scenarios possible.
currently, process mining has been applied in many organizations (e.g. mu-
nicipalities, banks, government agencies) and it is attracting a huge interest from
industry too [1]. process mining has also been used in the healthcare domain
(see section 2.2 for an overview). for these applications typically only data is
taken from one system in order to solve a particular problem. for example, data
is taken from a particular medical department or data is taken from an admin-
istrative system. however, an overview is missing of the application possibilities
of process mining within the entire hospital. therefore, in this paper we investi-
gate the data challenges that are faced when answering frequently posed questions
during process mining projects in hospitals . first, we present an overview of the
type of process mining questions that are frequently posed by medical profession-
als. second, we investigate which process mining data can be found in current
hospital information systems (hiss). also, we investigate the characteristics of
- 107 -such data and whether it allows for solving the frequently posed questions. as
part of this, we present a spectrum which, based on two dimensions, provides a
classiﬁcation of the systems in a his. finally, by means of a concrete case study
it is illustrated which data challenges exist when answering typical process min-
ing questions. finally, open problems and challenges for applying process mining
in healthcare are discussed.
the outline of this paper is as follows. in section 2, we introduce the basics
of process mining and give an overview of process mining applications to health
care processes. in section 3, we outline the questions that are typically posed by
medical professionals in process mining projects. in section 4, we describe the
di↵erent types of event data found in a his. afterwards, in section 5, the case
study is discussed. finally, section 6 concludes the paper with an overview of
open problems and challenges.
2 process mining
in this section, we ﬁrst give an introduction to process mining followed by an
overview of the applications of process mining in healthcare that have been
identiﬁed in literature.
2.1 overview
process mining is applicable to a wide range of systems. the only requirement
is that the system produces event logs , thus recording (parts of) the actual
behavior. for these event logs it is important that each event refers to a well-
deﬁned step in the process (e.g. a lab test) and is related to a particular case (e.g.
a patient). also, additional information such as the performer of the event (i.e.
the doctor performing the test), the timestamp of the event, or data elements
recorded along with the event (e.g. the age of the patient) may be stored. based
on these event logs, the goal of process mining is to extract process knowledge
(e.g. process models) in order to discover, monitor, and improve real processes [1].
as shown in figure 1, three types of process mining can be distinguished.
discovery: inferring process models that are able to reproduce the observed
behavior. the inferred model may be a petri net, a bpmn model, or an epc.
for example, the discovered model may describe the typical steps taken before
surgery. note that also models describing the organizational, performance, and
data perspective may be discovered.
conformance: checking if observed behavior in the event log conforms to a
given model. for example, it may be checked whether a medical guideline which
states that always a lab test and an x-ray needs to be done is always followed.
extension: projection of the information extracted from the log onto the model.
for example, performance information may be projected on a discovered health-
care process in order to see for which examinations a long waiting time exists.
the prom framework and tool set has become the de facto standard for
process mining. prom ( www.processmining.org ) is a “plug-able” environment
for process mining using mxml, sa-mxml, or xes as input format.
2- 108 -fig. 1. three types of process mining: (1) discovery, (2) conformance, and (3) exten-
sion.
2.2 application of process mining in healthcare
there is a huge potential for process mining in healthcare as it allows hospitals
to analyze and streamline their processes. however, when checking literature
concerning the application of process mining in healthcare, it can be seen that
it is a relatively unexplored ﬁeld. in total, 12 scholarly publications have been
identiﬁed in which an application of process mining in healthcare was described.
that is, in [12,16] the gynaecological oncology healthcare process within an uni-
versity hospital has been analyzed; in [17] several processes within an emergency
department have been investigated; in [9] all computer tomography (ct), mag-
netic resonance imaging (mri), ultrasound, and x-ray appointments within a
radiology workﬂow have been analyzed; in [21] the focus is upon the process that
is followed by patients su ↵ering from rheumatoid arthritis; in [6] the treatment
of patients within an intensive care unit has been investigated; in [6,11] process
mining has been applied to di ↵erent datasets for stroke patients; in [14] the ac-
tivities that are performed for patients during hospitalization for breast cancer
treatment are investigated; in [13] the journey through multiple wards has been
discovered for inpatients; in [18] the processes for mamma care patients and di-
abetes foot patients has been investigated, in [2], the workﬂow of a laparascopic
surgery has been analyzed, and ﬁnally in [5] process mining has been applied to
the event logs of more than thousand x-ray machines all over the world.
these publications demonstrate that process mining can be successfully ap-
plied in the healthcare domain. also, event log data may originate from various
data sources in a hospital. for example, the data used in [12,16,18,21] originated
from an administrative system within the hospital. furthermore, data may also
come from an intensive care unit [6], neurology department [11], and radiology
3- 109 -type azm amc isala ggze [2][5][6][9][11][12][13][14][16][17][18][21]
q1 x x x x xxxx xxxxxxx
q2 x x x x x
q3 x x x x x
q4 x x x xx
table 1. for azm, amc, isala klinieken, and ggze it is indicated by a cross which
type of questions have been posed by their medical professionals in process mining
projects. furthermore, for the papers that discussed an application of process mining
in healthcare, it is also indicated which type of questions have been posed by them.
department [9]. finally, process mining can also be applied to data of medical
devices [2,5]. however, to date, no work exists which provides an overview of all
the data in a hospital that can be used for process mining and its characteristics.
3 questions
in this section, we give an overview of the type of questions that are fre-
quently posed by medical professionals in process mining projects. in order
to come up with a list of frequently posed questions, we have systematically
analyzed the publications in section 2.2. furthermore, we are involved in a re-
search project aiming at enhancing the uptake of process mining in hospitals3.
in this project, we have analyzed datasets of academisch ziekenhuis maastricht
(azm4), academisch medisch centrum (amc5), isala klinieken6, and geestelijke
gezondheidszorg eindhoven (ggze7). the questions asked by their medical pro-
fessionals are included in the list. note that of course more questions can be
solved using process mining. here, our focus is on the questions that are fre-
quently posed by medical professionals. afterwards, we investigate in section 4
whether the process mining data that can be found in current his allows for
answering these questions.
the list of frequently posed questions is given below. each type of question is
elaborated upon and illustrated by concrete examples. furthermore, in table 1
for azm, amc, isala klinieken, and ggze it is indicated by a cross which type
of questions have been posed by their medical professionals in process mining
projects. also, for the papers that discussed an application of process mining
in healthcare, it is indicated which type of questions have been asked by them.
note that the ﬁrst two questions relate to the discovery type of process mining,
the third to conformance, and the last one to extension.
3http://www.stw.nl/nl/content/developing-tools-understanding-healthcare-processes
4www.azm.nl
5www.amc.nl
6www.isala.nl
7www.ggze.nl
4- 110 -q1:what are the most followed paths and what exceptional paths are
followed? :
for the standard paths the medical specialists are mainly interested in the ac-
tivities that are typically executed and the order of them. for exceptional paths,
medical professionals are interested in whether this is caused by the way of work-
ing of medical specialists (inter-specialist variability) or whether this is due to
a speciﬁc group of patients (e.g. medically complex patients). for example, in
isala klinieken they were interested in seeing the main process followed by urol-
ogy patients in order to identify whether the process needs to be changed or
not. furthermore, for the exceptional paths they wanted to know whether these
exceptions are related to speciﬁc patient characteristics or not.
q2:are there di ↵erences in care paths followed by di ↵erent patient
groups? :
here, the medical professionals are mainly interested in seeing the di ↵erences
and whether subsequently process parts need to be adjusted. this comparison
may not only be interesting for patient groups within a hospital but also for
similar patient groups in di ↵erent hospitals. for example, medical specialists
in azm were interested in comparing the process of colorectal cancer patients
and hepato-pancreato-biliary (hpb) patients as for the ﬁrst group of patients
measures have been taken to optimize the process and similar measures have not
been taken for the latter group. another example can be found in isala klinieken
that wanted to compare their urology healthcare process with the same process
of another hospital in order to see whether they can do things di ↵erently in their
process (e.g. skipping activities).
q3:do we comply with internal and external guidelines? :
for certain patient groups, standards are deﬁned either by external bodies (e.g.
government) or internally within the hospital itself (e.g. the medical specialists
themself). an example of an external guideline is that in the netherlands, for
cancer patients, a standard is deﬁned which indicates that for 80% of the pa-
tients, the start of the clinical treatment of the patient should happen within 5
weeks of the ﬁrst visit [19]. an example of an internal guideline is that in azm,
a care pathway has been deﬁned by the medical specialists about the treatment
of colorectal cancer patients and the time period in which certain activities need
to be completed.
q4:where are the bottlenecks in the process? :
one of the main motivations for using process mining is that throughput times
for treating patients need to be minimized. for example, at the surgery depart-
ment of amc they had the impression that quite a long time passes before the
patient is again seen on the outpatient clinic. therefore, they were interested in
seeing the medical departments for which long waiting times exist.
obviously, all frequently posed questions are related to learning about how
the current process is executed and which process areas need improvement.
5- 111 -4 process mining data spectrum
in order to be able to answer the frequently posed questions that are given in
section 3, data needs to be available about the process steps, their timing, and
for which patient each step is performed. this data is typically available within
a his. a his is the socio-technical subsystem of a hospital, which comprises
all information processing as well as the associated human or technical actors
in their respective information processing roles [8]. in this section, a spectrum
is discussed which classiﬁes the typical event data found in such systems. we
do not aim to provide a full classiﬁcation of all systems in a his. we are only
interested in these systems that contain the basic process mining information
(i.e. each event refers to a well-deﬁned step in the process, is related to a par-
ticular case, and has a timestamp). as a consequence, we only consider the in-
formation processing tools of a his. additionally, we only focus on the support
oforganizational processes within a his. organizational healthcare processes
capture the organizational knowledge which is necessary to coordinate collabo-
rating healthcare professionals and organizational units (e.g. reporting of results
or preparations for surgery) [10].
the spectrum that will be presented in this section is based on discussions
with his professionals from two dutch hospitals and the his classiﬁcations
discussed in [8, 15]. in this way, we believe that the classiﬁcation is generally
applicable.
as shown in figure 2, the spectrum distinguishes four systems and is based
on two dimensions. the ﬁrst dimension concerns the level of abstraction of the
events . the level of abstraction is average if the event refers to an individual task,
high if the event refers to a collection of tasks (e.g. a (sub)process), and low if
the event refers to movements within a task (e.g. conﬁguring a ct-scanner).
the second dimension concerns the accuracy of the timestamp of the events.
this dimension is divided into three di ↵erent subdimensions. the granularity
subdimension refers to the granularity of the timestamp and is high in case
of milliseconds granularity, average in case of hour/minute granularity and low
in case of day granularity. the directness of registration subdimension is high
if timestamps are directly registered (e.g. automatically), and low if they are
registered later (e.g. manually). the correctness subdimension is high if the
timestamp is logged correctly given the chosen level of granularity and low if the
timestamp is logged incorrectly given the chosen level of granularity.
the spectrum distinguishes the following systems:
administrative systems take care of the administration and billing of all ac-
countable services. the primary purpose of these systems is the registration
of services that have been delivered to patients (e.g. treatments and examina-
tions). for example, by dutch law all hospitals need to record the diagnosis and
treatment steps at the level of individual patients in order to receive payment.
therefore, it is su  cient to know that services have been delivered to patients.
as a results, they may be entered manually into the system and only a day
timestamp needs to be assigned to them. so, both the directness and the gran-
ularity of timestamps is low. the correctness subdimension is average as the
6- 112 -level of abstractionaccuracyhighlowlowhighmedicaldevicesadministrative systemsclinical support systemshealthcarelogisticssystems
a) visualization of the spectrumb) for each type of system, it is indicated which value is given for the ‘level of abstraction’ and ‘accuracy’ dimension. also, for the ‘accuracy’ dimension it is indicated which value is given for each subdimension.levelofabstractionaccuracygranularitydirectnesscorrectness
administrativesystemshighlowlowlowaverage
clinicalsupportsystemsaverageaverageaveragelowhigh
healthcarelogisticssystemsaveragehigh/averageaverage/lowhighhigh
medicaldeviceslowhigh/averagehighhighaverage
fig. 2. process mining data spectrum.
logging of timestamps may be incorrect. for example, in one hospital the wrong
timestamp was recorded for one diagnostic test due to wrong batch recording,.
in conclusion, the level of abstraction of events is high and the level of accuracy
of timestamps is low.
clinical support systems involve systems of departments having such special-
ized needs that they require special information systems . the purpose of these
systems is to support the clinical work at a department (e.g. pathology or inten-
sive care). as such it is required to register at a task-based level what has been
performed for patients. due to the repetitive nature of some tasks (e.g. measur-
ing blood pressure on an intensive care unit), it is necessary to know in which
hour or minute these tasks have taken place. so, the granularity subdimension
of timestamps is average. typically, these tasks are entered manually into the
system. consequently, the directness of the associated timestamp is low. gener-
ally, these systems do not face any logging issues and hence the correctness of
the timestamp of events is high. in sum, the level of abstraction of events and
the level of accuracy of timestamps is average.
healthcare logistics systems support the logistics of operational processes .
7- 113 -the primary purpose of these systems is that appointments can be made for
patients and that services from medical departments can be requested, i.e. order
entry and order communication. as such, events typically refer to tasks that
are performed (e.g. making an appointment, ﬁlling in and sending an order).
as events typically refer to tasks that are performed by people that are using
the system itself, both the directness and correctness of timestamps is high. the
granularity subdimension of timestamps typically varies between average and
low. in conclusion, the level of abstraction of events is average and the level of
accuracy of the timestamp ranges from high to average.
medical devices involve the systems belonging to devices that are used by med-
ical professionals . the goal is to collect detailed information that is useful for
the manufacturer of the medical device. for example, low-level information may
be recorded concerning user commands, run-time information, and errors that
occur (e.g. for an x-ray machine user commands such as moving a table or cap-
turing a single image are stored). as such, small pieces of work which are part
of a task are recorded but also state information of medical devices is recorded.
this information is recorded automatically. consequently, the directness sub-
dimension of timestamps is high. furthermore, to make time-wise sense from
the information that is recorded, timestamps are recorded at the level of mil-
liseconds. so, the granularity subdimension of timestamps is high. however, due
to the very precise recording of events, there may be issues with regard to the
correctness of the recorded timestamps. for example, for a provider of x-rays
all over the world we have seen that the event and its timestamp was recorded
at the moment that the storage bu ↵er for logging information was emptied. as
a result, the correctness of timestamps is average. all together, the level of ab-
straction of events is low and the level of accuracy of timestamps can range from
average to high.
for solving the type of questions in section 3, typically data from adminis-
trative systems are used. however, for this data, the timestamps of events are
only registered in days and the level of abstraction of events is high. this may
cause problems when answering the frequently posed questions in section 3.
for example, for discovering the most followed paths as part of question type
“q1”, the exact ordering of some activities may not be clear due to the fact that
precise timing information is not available. as a result, activities in the discov-
ered process may occur in parallel while in reality this might not be the case.
subsequently, this may also cause issues when comparing processes for di ↵erent
patient groups in order to answer questions of type “q2”. besides, checking the
compliance with internal and external guidelines as part of question type “q3”
might be problematic. often, detailed knowledge about the process steps that
are performed at a medical department is required for compliance checking. as
the level of abstraction of data coming from administrative systems is high, this
detailed information may not be available and therefore problems during com-
pliance checking are faced. furthermore, for obtaining performance information
about the discovered process as part of question type “q4” the high level of
abstraction of events and the high level of accuracy of timestamps may both
8- 114 -be problematic. for example, highly accurate timestamps on a task level are
required for gaining insights into in-hospital waiting times.
so, in order to provide a complete answer to the four types of questions
provided in section 3, data from other systems of the spectrum of figure 2 is
required. for example, data from a healthcare logistics system may be required
in order to obtain the exact appointment time of an examination. also, data
from a clinical support system may be taken in order to discover the steps that
are typically performed at a medical department as part of an examination.
5 case study
in this section, a case study is discussed in order to illustrate the challenges
that are faced when answering frequently posed questions during process mining
projects. the case study has been performed at the gastro-enterology department
of azm and involves a group of colorectal cancer patients for which surgery was
needed. first, we discuss the questions that have been asked by the medical
professionals. second, we present the data that has been used for solving these
questions. third, results and open challenges are discussed.
in section 3, we introduced questions q1 to q4. azm was particularly in-
terested in q1: what are the main paths that are followed by patients in the
process? ,q3: do we comply with the national guideline regarding the treatment
of cancer patients? andq4: are there medical disciplines for which long waiting
times exist? . one of the main reasons that these questions were asked was that
in january 2009, a dedicated nurse has been appointed which is responsible for
the e  cient planning of appointments and for acceptable throughput times.
as the above mentioned questions relate to the entire process of diagnosing
and treating patients, we collected data from an “administrative system” within
azm. this system takes care of the fact that by dutch law all hospitals need
to record the diagnosis and treatment steps at the level of individual patients
in order to receive payment. using this system, we extracted data of gastro-
enterology patients which have been treated for rectum cancer from 2009 till
2012 and for which surgery was needed. a snippet of the data that we received
is shown in figure 3. here, each line describes a service that has been delivered
to a patient. note that the data has been anonymized in order to maintain con-
ﬁdentiality. the ﬁrst line shows that the mean corpuscular volume of the blood
was calculated (column “description operation”) which was requested by doc-
tor ’mans’ (column requesting relation) and performed by doctor “vanwersch”
(column “executing doctor”) from the haematological lab (column “description
department”) on july 10th 2008 (column “start date operation”). note that
for each service delivered, it is only known on which day the service has been
delivered.
figure 4 shows some results regarding the process till surgery. these results
have been used for answering the above mentioned questions. figure 4a, shows
a dotted chart which visualizes events as dots. on the vertical axis the di ↵erent
cases (i.e. patients) are shown and events are colored according to their activity
9- 115 -patientidentifierday ofbirthsexaddressrequestingrelationexecutingdoctorrequesting departmentexecutingdepartmentdescriptiondepartmentoperationdescription operation
movement identifiertrajectory identifierexternal statustrajectory codestart dateoperationdiagnosisdescription diagnosisstart datetrajectorynumberof operationsdepartmentidentifierstart year of trajectory
fig. 3. a snippet of the excel ﬁle that contained the raw data of azm. for each column
the dutch description has been provided.
endoscopy
visits to outpatient clinicseries of diagnostic tests
admission to nursing wardvisit to emergency department38 patients25 patients9 patientsa) dotted chart for the process till surgery, i.e., all cases start at time zero. the chart reveals a large variation in throughput. also, with regard to the throughput time, three different groups can be distinguished.
b) the process till surgery for rectum cancer patientsoc gastro-enterologyendoscopy annadalendoscopyendoscopy annadalstartemergency
labradiology endoscopypatho-logyradio-logylab
oc surgeryoc gastro-enterologyoc sur-gery
oc nuclear medicineoc anesthesiaoc patho-logyoc electro-cardio-graphylabradiologyocdieticspatho-logyendo  scopy
nursing ward c4nursing ward c2 aoanursingwarda2nursingwardb4nursingwarda4endfig. 4. a dotted chart and petri net describing the patient process before surgery.
10- 116 -names. as can be seen, the process is shown using relative time, i.e. all cases start
at time zero. the chart shows that there is a large variation in the total through-
put time of cases. furthermore, three patient groups can be distinguished. the
ﬁrst group of 38 patients did not receive any radiotherapy before surgery. the
second group of 25 patients received radiotherapy before the surgery explaining
the longer throughput times (from 101 days till 154 days). the last group of
9 patients appeared to be complex cases for which an individualized treatment
was necessary.
for the ﬁrst group of patients, the total throughput times ranges from 21
days to 60 days. as a consequence, the national guideline regarding acceptable
waiting times between diagnosis and treatment for cancer patients is violated.
the discovered process is shown in the petri net of figure 4b. for the process
model the aim was to extend it with performance information. therefore, it was
required that the model is a good reﬂection of the behavior captured in the log.
the following approach has been used for the construction of the model. first, a
process mining algorithm has been applied in order to discover a process model
which shows the medical departments that were visited and their order. second,
the process model was adapted by hand and it was checked in the process mining
tool prom how well it reﬂected the behavior in the log. this second step was
repeated till the model was a good reﬂection of the behavior captured in the
log. furthermore, performance information has been projected on the model by
coloring the places. a blue color indicates a low waiting time (less than 5 days),
a yellow color indicates a medium waiting time (between 5 and 10 days), and
a pink color indicates a high waiting time (more than 10 days). the thickness
of the arc indicates how often the path has been followed, i.e a thick arc means
that the path has been followed often. note that the grey rectangles represent
medical departments whereas the black rectangles are only added because of
routing purposes. in general, the process is as follows. first, an endoscopy takes
place followed by some diagnostic tests (e.g. a radiology test) or the patient
immediately visits the outpatient clinic of gastro-enterology. after visiting the
outpatient clinic, a series of diagnostic tests takes place (e.g. a lab or radiology
test) followed by another contact of the patient with a doctor of either gastro-
enterology or surgery, i.e. a visit to the hospital or a consultation by telephone.
also, after the tests, it may occur that the patient suddenly visits the emergency
department of the hospital or the patient may be admitted to the hospital.
figure 4b shows that there is a high waiting time before the patient can be
admitted to the hospital (average: 12.87 days, standard deviation: 5.68 days)
and before a patient has contact with a doctor of gastro-enterology or surgery.
for the outpatient clinic of gastro-enterology the waiting time is on average 4.25
days (standard deviation: 15.32 hours) whereas the waiting time for surgery is on
average 6.63 days (standard deviation: 16.61 hours). furthermore, the process
of having a contact with the doctor followed by a series of diagnostic tests is
repeated multiple times. on average, this is repeated more than two times.
in conclusion, clear suggestions can be provided for improving the process.
however, there are still some challenges remaining due to limitations of the
11- 117 -provided data. for example, there is quite some parallelism in the process of
figure 4b which causes problems when answering the question about the main
paths that are followed by patients in the process (question type “q1”). as
only day timestamps were available for the events, it was di  cult to ﬁnd more
causal relations. regarding compliance checking (question type “q3”) it was
not possible to check the compliance with the national guideline for access times
due to the fact that information about scheduling of appointments is missing in
an administrative system. also, if a patient has multiple appointments on one
day, it cannot be seen how much in-hospital waiting time passes between these
appointments. the latter causes problems in answering the question about the
medical disciplines for which long in-hospital waiting times exist (question type
“q4”). in order to solve the aforementioned issues it is required to augment
the available data with data from other systems (e.g. from a healthcare logistics
system).
6 conclusions
in this paper we have discussed the application of process mining in hospitals.
therefore, we have ﬁrst given an overview of the questions that are frequently
posed by medical professionals. afterwards, by means of a spectrum, we have
described the di ↵erent types of event data found in current hiss and elaborated
upon whether this event data allows for answering the questions posed in process
mining projects.
although process mining has matured over the last years and many mining
techniques are available, several important open problems and challenges are
remaining. first, when looking to all four systems of the spectrum, it is clear that
data is spread around disparate data sources. based on the questions posed by
the medical professionals, data may be required from di ↵erent data sources. this
requires that links between the four systems of the spectrum are clear. the usage
of ontologies is interesting in this respect. ontologies can be used for deﬁning
an appropriate scope and to identify the case from the data sources. currently,
some research is performed in the context of ontologies and (semantic) process
mining [3, 20]. further research should explore opportunities for developing an
ontology for process mining systems in the healthcare domain.
second, several problems and challenges can be distinguished when looking
to individual systems of the spectrum. for example, for many types of systems
we have to deal with events of which the granularity of the timestamp is low.
one reason is that the timestamp only refers to the day on which events occur.
consequently, current process mining algorithms have problems with identifying
the correct control-ﬂow as the ordering of events within the log do not necessarily
conform to the ordering of events on the day itself. further research is needed
in this respect.
another issue is that a timestamp may not be correct based on the cho-
sen level of granularity. currently, some research has been performed (also in a
healthcare context) on the identiﬁcation of abnormal cases and infrequent exe-
12- 118 -cution patterns by means of outlier detection techniques [4,7]. future research is
needed in order to identify suspicious patterns regarding the recording of times-
tamps of events, not only within the same case but also among multiple cases.
acknowledgements
this research is supported by the dutch technology foundation stw, applied
science division of nwo and the technology program of the ministry of eco-
nomic a ↵airs.
references
1. w.m.p. van der aalst. process mining: discovery, conformance and enhancement
of business processes . springer-verlag, berlin, 2011.
2. t. blum, n. padoy, h. feuner, and n. navab. workﬂow mining for visualization
and analysis of surgeries. international journal of computer assisted radiology
and surgery ,3 : 3 7 9 – 3 8 6 ,2 0 0 8 .
3. a.k. alves de medeiros and w.m.p. van der aalst. advances in web semantics
i,v o l u m e4 8 9 1o f lecture notes in computer science , chapter process mining
towards semantics, pages 35–80. springer-verlag, berlin, 2008.
4. l. ghionna, g. greco, a. guzzo, and l. pontieri. outlier detection techniques
for process mining applications. in ismis 2008 ,p a g e s1 5 0 – 1 5 9 ,2 0 0 8 .
5. c.w. g¨ unther, a. rozinat, w.m.p. van der aalst, and k. van uden. monitoring
deployed application usage with process mining. bpm center report bpm-08-
11, bpmcenter.org, 2008.
6. s. gupta. workﬂow and process mining in healthcare. master’s thesis, eindhoven
university of technology, eindhoven, 2007.
7. b. han, l. jiang, and h. cai. abnormal process instances identiﬁcation method
in healthcare environment. in proceedings of ieee trustcom 2011 ,p a g e s1 3 8 7 –
1392, 2011.
8. r. haux, a. winter, e. ammenwerth, and b. brigl. strategic information man-
agement in hospitals: an introduction to hospital information systems . springer-
verlag, berlin, 2004.
9. m. lang, t. b¨ urkle, s. laumann, and h.-u. prokosch. process mining for clinical
workﬂows: challenges and current limitations. in proceedings of mie 2008 ,
volume 136 of studies in health technology and informatics ,p a g e s2 2 9 – 2 3 4 .i o s
press, 2008.
10. r. lenz and m. reichert. it support for healthcare processes - premises, chal-
lenges, perspectives. data and knowledge engineering ,6 1 : 4 9 – 5 8 ,2 0 0 7 .
11. r.s. mans, m.h. schonenberg, g. leonardi, s. panzarasa, s. quaglini, and w.m.p.
van der aalst. process mining techniques : an application to stroke care. in pro-
ceedings of mie 2008 ,v o l u m e1 3 6o f studies in health technology and informatics ,
pages 573–578. ios press, 2008.
12. r.s. mans, m.h. schonenberg, m.s. song, w.m.p. van der aalst, and p.j.m.
bakker. application of process mining in healthcare : a case study in a dutch
hospital. in proceedings of biostec 2008 ,v o l u m e2 5o f communications in
computer and information science , pages 425–438. springer-verlag, berlin, 2009.
13- 119 -13. l. perimal-lewis, s. qin, c. thompson, and p. hakendorf. gaining insight from
patient journey data using a process-oriented analysis approach. in hikm 2012 ,
volume 129 of conferences in research and practice in information technology ,
pages 59–66. australian computer society, inc., 2012.
14. j. poelmans, g. dedene, g. verheyden, h. van der mussele, s. viaene, and e. pe-
ters. combining business process and data discovery techniques for analyzing
and improving integrated care pathways. in proceedings of icdm’10 ,v o l u m e
6171 of lecture notes in computer science , pages 505–517. springer-verlag, berlin,
2010.
15. r. rada. information systems and healthcare enterprises .i g ig l o b a l ,2 0 0 8 .
16. l. torres ramos. healthcare process analysis : validation and improvements of
a data-based method using process mining and visual analytics. master’s thesis,
eindhoven university of technology, eindhoven, 2009.
17. a. rebuge and d.r. ferreira. business process analysis in healthcare environ-
ments: a methodology based on process mining. information systems ,3 7 ( 2 ) ,
2012.
18. p. riemers. process improvement in healthcare : a data-based method using a
combination of process mining and visual analytics. master’s thesis, eindhoven
university of technology, eindhoven, 2009.
19. treekoverleg. tr-039, notitie streefnormstelling wachttijden curatieve sector,
2000. in dutch.
20. j.m.e.m. van der werf, h.m.w. verbeek, and w.m.p. van der aalst. context-
aware compliance checking. to appear in proceedings of bpm 2012.
21. j.y. zhou. process mining : acquiring objective process information for health-
care process management with the crisp-dm framework. master’s thesis, eind-
hoven university of technology, eindhoven, 2009.
14- 120 -