24th australasian conference on information systems  cost-aware bpm : a research agenda  
4-6 dec 2013, melbourne  wynn  et al.   
cost -aware business process management: a research agenda  
 
moe thandar wynn1, jochen de weerdt1, arthur ter hofstede1,2, wil van der aalst1,2, hajo a. reijers2,3, 
michael adams1, chun ouyang1, michael rosemann1 and wei zhe low1  
1queensland university of t echnology, brisbane, australia  
{m.wynn, jochen.deweerdt, a.terhofstede ,mj.adams,c.ouyang, ,m.rosemann ,wz.low }@qut.edu.au  
2eindhoven university of technology, eindhoven, the netherlands  
             {w.m.p.v.d.aalst ,h.a.reijers }@tue.nl  
3perceptive software, a peldoorn, the netherlands  
hajo.reijers@perceptivesoftware.com  
organis ations are constantly seeking cost -effective improvements for their business processes. business process 
management (bpm) provides organisations with a range of methods, technique s and to ols for analysing, 
managing, and optimis ing their business operations. however, bpm initiatives within organisations  tend to  
focus on invest igating time and resource utilis ation inefficiencies, rather than directly on cost inefficiencies. as 
a result, high -level cost -based managerial decisions are still being made separately from process related 
decisions. this position paper  describes  a research agenda that envisages a holistic approach to managing the 
cost of business operations in a structured manner , by making an explicit link between cost and processes in all 
phases of the business process management life cycle. we discuss a number of research challenges that need to 
be addressed in order to realise such an approach as well as findings from some of the initial research 
outcomes. it is envisioned that the research outcomes will enable organisations to make operational and 
strategic decisions with confidence based on accurate and real -time cost information about their operations.  
keywords  
cost-aware busine ss process management, cost-aware process design, cost-informed process execution, cost-
informed process impro vement, log -based cost analysis, research agenda – position paper.  
introduction  
traditionally, business process management and cost management are  considered in isolation , although both 
disciplines are concerned with identifying ways to ensure efficient and effective business operations. as a result, 
managerial decisions about cost reductions are made separately from decisions regarding process impr ovements. 
to remain competitive, an organisation's core processes must be able to flexibly and efficiently adjust to cost 
changes as they occur. however, to the best of our knowledge, no sophisticated and integrated cost management 
practices can be found i n process -aware information systems  (pais) , which are i nclusive of  business process 
management systems  (bpms ).  
business process management  (bpm)  defines a methodology to design, configure, execute , and  diagnose 
processes within organisations (van der aals t et al. 2003; weske 2007). business processes go through a life 
cycle of four iterative phases, namely  design, implementation, enactment, and diagnosis (dumas et al. 2005). 
during the design phase, process models are created based on a detailed requiremen ts analysis of business 
operations. in the implementation phase, the modelled processes are implemented into operational business 
processes. after implementation, business processes are executed and execution trails may be recorded in event 
logs, represent ing the actual behaviour of the process. finally, the diagnosis phase is the common denominator 
for all activities and techniques that encompass  the analysis of business processes , the outcomes of which  
provide feedback for process (re)design activities. through the iterative application of bpm techniques, 
processes can be improved in terms of quality, flexibility, time and/or cost ( brand and van der kolk 1995 ). 
typically , process -aware information systems are not cost -driven . this lack of operational suppo rt impedes the 
ability of organisations to make  time-critical , cost-informed decisions  at runtime .  
generally, organisations rely on financial data from traditional costing and accounting systems to make cost -
related decisions. management accounting techni ques provide decision makers with an ability to plan ahead of 
time and to make informed strategic decisions based on cost , although it is time consuming to gather relevant 
data for such analyses. three of the best-known management accounting techniques are  activity -based costing 
(abc) (kaplan and atkinson 1998), time -driven activity -based costing (tdabc) (kaplan et al. 2007) and 
resource consumption accounting (rca) (white 2009).  by providing automated  solutions that make use of 
process data required for su ch management accounting techniques , the data gathering efforts of managers can be 
lessened . timely generation of process -based cost reports and cost forecasts becomes achievable when the 
connection  between bpm and management accounting  is realised .  24th australasian conference on information systems  cost-aware bpm : a research agenda  
4-6 dec 2013, melbourne  wynn  et al.   
cost is traditionally considered as one of the many non -functional requirements (nfr) for a software system or 
service , in the same manner as maintainability, usability, reliability, traceability, quality or safety  (chung et al. 
2000) . however, we position cost as representing an intrinsic perspective that overlays all business processes . 
an organisation can achieve significant cost savings through real -time cost-informed decision  making  and hence, 
we believe that cost cannot be treated as just another nfr to be  taken into ac count after the fact. we argue  that 
cost concerns can and should be explicitly taken into account in each of the bpm life cycle  phases to enable 
cost-informed managerial and operational decisions regarding business operations.  
in this paper, we present  an innovative research agenda on the topic of cost -aware business process management. 
we describe how the cost of business operations can be considered as an integral part of a business process 
management initiative within the different phases o f the process life cycle. accordingly, this paper first describes 
key research questions  as well as an overview of research challeng es. the paper also includes  a description of  
initial realisations for some of these challenges and a brief conclusion.  
resea rch questions  
in general, this research agenda elaborates on how cost information can be associated with business processes  in 
their life  cycle phases  and as such broaden the scope of bpm . realis ing this goal requires a thorough 
understanding of the kind o f cost measures that can and should be associated with business processes in order to 
make cost -informed process decisions at different phases of the bpm life cycle . for instance, we need to 
consider how typical cost measures such as raw material s, labour and overhead costs can be linked to processes 
that are used in producing goods or delivering services. ideally, such cost measures need to be available at 
design time (e.g., to make design choices about a cheaper process alternative), at runtime (e.g., sel ecting a 
cheaper material or resource) and at post-execution  time (e.g. cost reporting and analys is). the first step towards 
realis ing this goal is the definition of appropriate data structures for relating cost information to typical bpm 
artefacts , such a s activities  or resources. such a mapping, or cost model , will be concretised in a later section , 
but first the life cycle specific research questions are explained , as represented in  
figure 1. 
rq1.  how can process -related cost information enrich  process (re)design ? 
we can imagine a number of ways in which cos t information can be utilised during the process design 
phase, by associating cost information with the process model. first, process models annotated with 
cost inf ormation (e.g., the cost of an activity, the cost of a resource)  could improve human 
interpretation by facilitating communication and discussions about desired characteristics.  for instance, 
activities in bpmn can be colour -coded based on their cost values  or expensive regions in the process 
can be highlighted. second , process design can be enriched with automated reasoning functionality 
such as simulation  (“what -if” analysis)  and, potentially,  verification  that make use of detailed cost 
models .  
 
 
figure 1. the bpm life cycle and the key research questions for cost -aware business process management.  24th australasian conference on information systems  cost-aware bpm : a research agenda  
4-6 dec 2013, melbourne  wynn  et al.   
rq2.  how can cost -aware business process execution environments be realised ? 
automation is a fundamental  characteristic of a bpms . accordi ngly, cost-aware business process 
management research should focus on the implementation  phase  as well . as it is envisaged that 
processes will rely on cost information for key bpms functions  such as control -flow handling, resource 
allocation, etc., it is r equired that bpms implementations leverage this potential by allowing cost -
informed business rules, specified in  the design phase , to be enacted . this entails that appropriate 
connections are put in place between a bpms and accounting information systems , as well as realis ing 
cost-based rules, triggers, resource allocation strategies , etc.  
rq3.  how can cost information enhance operational support in a bpms/pais?  
bpms and workflow systems typically provide support during the enactment of business processes. 
cost-aware bpm research should explore how operational support can be enriched with functionality 
that exploits cost information. by making bpmss cost -aware, informed operational decisions can be 
made at runtime using static cost data (i.e., cost rates) as wel l as historical cost figures (i.e., the cost of 
past process instances). the main challenge relates to the design and implementation of a framework 
that is capable of keeping track of process -related costs and provides support for cost-based rules.  
rq4.  how can  business processes be diagnosed from a cost perspective?  
the diagnosis phase potentially  forms a primary target where a bridge between the bpm domain and 
management accounting can be most easily constructed. cost models can be built based on cost 
informat ion available in accounting or erp systems, which subsequently can be linked to process 
execution data stored in event logs. as such, it becomes possible to attach costs to activities, resources, 
and cases. the first question to be addressed is concerned w ith finding ways to enhance process 
reporting and process mining techniques with cost information.  there is also a need for n ew techniques 
and tools that make use of cost models and event logs for cost-infor med business process improvement.  
motivating exa mple  
we consider a simplified home loan application and approval process as an example to illustrate the utilisation 
of cost information through the bpm life cycle (presented in the previous section). figure 2 depicts the example 
process model annotated wi th the relevant cost information.  
 
figure 2. a home loan process modelled in yawl (annotated with cost information) . 
design . the model is designed using the yawl workflow language (ter hofstede et al. 2010) . the cost 
information is specified as attributes in the data and resource definitions of each of the tasks in th e process 
model, and represented as  cost annotations in figure 2. for simplicity, the example considers role -based 
resource assignment only and each task  in the proce ss is assigned to one specific role . with this example, the 
cost model includes the cost rates of resources and activities at a bank, and of mortgage broker services. these 
rates can be categorised into: role -based (variable) cost rate of a resource (e.g.,  bank employees in the role of 
loan processor are paid based on their salary scales); fixed cost rate of a resource undertaking a certain activity 
(e.g., a mortgage underwriter charges $300 to conduct risk assessment for a loan case); fixed cost rate for a n 24th australasian conference on information systems  cost-aware bpm : a research agenda  
4-6 dec 2013, melbourne  wynn  et al.   
activity (e.g., a mortgage insurance processing fee of $50 per loan application); and case -based (variable) cost 
rate (e.g., a mortgage broker service commission fee of 0.5% of the loan amount).  
implementation . we assume that the cost optimisation strate gy for this home loan process is to minimise the 
cost for processing a loan.  we illustrate different categories of cost -informed decisions: process -level decisions 
to guide the selection of process variant/s (e.g., when executing the “engage broker servic e” activity, the broker 
service provider that represents the best value for money will be selected); activity -level decisions to guide 
which of the succeeding activities to execute (e.g., the “(re -)assess loan application”  activity embeds a cost -
based pred icate  such that if the processing cost to this  point reaches a certain limit  proportional to the loan 
amount , then no further follow -up will be conducted); and resource -level decisions to guide resource allocation 
to activities (e.g., for the execution of the “prepare loan documents”  activity, the “cheapest resource ” resource 
allocation strategy is applied). the specification of such cost -based rules needs to be supported within the 
execution environment.  
enactment.  the actual realis ation of the process wil l require the availability of up -to-date cost information at 
runtime. when cost information is made available during execution, we can say that cost-informed  process 
enactment is realis ed. this is because process -, activity -, and resource -level operational  decisions can be made 
based on accurate and timely cost information.  
diagnosis.  finally, either by executing the process model, which would automatically generate a cost -annotated 
event log in a cost -aware workflow system, or by collecting event logs fro m the bank’s information systems 
without cost information but supplementing them with a cost model, opportunities arise to diagnose the home 
loan application process. this is illustrated in figure 3. the top part of the figure shows a simulated cost -
annota ted event log for the example process. in addition to control -flow and resource information,  events also 
contain cost measures. based on these cost measures, a first value -adding activity would be the automated 
generation of cost accounting -style reports, such as those shown in  the bottom -left part of the figure. because of 
the availability of process information (e.g. throughput times, resource allocations, etc.) in combination with 
actual cost amounts, significant information for cost reporting could be r ealised. secondly, cost -annotated event 
logs are an ideal starting point for cost -informed process analysis. an illustration of the “performance analysis 
with petri net” -plugin in prom  is shown on the right hand side.  inefficiencies identified during proc ess 
diagnosis, such as the bottleneck identified in figure 3, can serve as concrete starting points for process 
improvement, making cost a key driver for redesign. in our example, we might opt to change the resource 
allocation of the “do further follow -up” and “(re -)assess loan application” activities .  
 
figure 3. reporting and process diagnosis based on a cost -annotated event log for the home loan process.  24th australasian conference on information systems  cost-aware bpm : a research agenda  
4-6 dec 2013, melbourne  wynn  et al.   
research challenges  
this section further elaborates on the key research ch allenges to incorporat e the cost perspective within  the bpm  
domain. these challenges are motivated by the four high -level research questions presented earlier. first, we  
describe the data requirements for associating cost with processes  at a general level . subsequently , research 
challenges within the different life cycle phases  are detailed. for design, the incorporation of the cost view in 
process model visualisations with the aim of making cost -informed process design choices  is discussed . 
furthermore,  challenges with respect to the implementation of a cost -aware bpms a nd with respect to the 
realization of cost -informed operational support are identified. finally , challenges related to providing 
management accounting style cost reporting, cost -based foreca sting capabilities, as well as cost -informed event 
log analysis techniques  within the diagnosis phase  are discussed.  
general challenge: associati ng cost with business processes  
relevant cost measures for business processes need to be identified to understa nd the true origins of costs 
involved in business operations. a key  challenge is to develop a mechanism through which cost elements can be 
formally associated with business processes . in order to link cost with process models, we need to determine the 
data requirements for such an association. this entails a thorough understanding of the relationship between cost 
and different types of business process artefacts.  
cost model. the mapping between bpm artefacts and accounting terms will require the design of a new 
artefact, which  is the  cost model . while an initial realisation of a cost model is discussed later, in general , the 
association of cost information with business process artefacts such as activities, resources, and cases should be 
adaptable , i.e., ca pable of realis ing a mapping at the right level of granularity, as well as complete, thus 
associating all relevant costs invoked during process execution with process artefacts. furthermore, it should 
accommodate simple cost rates (e.g., time × cost rate ) as well as complex cost function s. the availability of a 
fully specified cost model, together with bpm artefacts such as process models , organisational models  and event 
logs, can provide  cost-informed support  across  the entire bpm life cycle.  
process desig n: enriching process design  with cost information  
incorporating a cost  view into the business process design tasks is a promising, yet largely unexplored research 
area. two distinct challenges are identified for cost -aware process design. first ly, process modelling languages 
and tools should be developed or extended with associated annotations through which cost information can be 
captured and visualised in process models. ideally, such cost -annotated process models should be dynamically 
updated with inform ation extracted from costing systems, execution data or simulations. secondly, process 
modellers  should be assisted in their tasks by means of cost -informed automated reasoning functionality 
supporting design decisions.  
cost -annotated process visualisatio n. while most business process modelling  languages largely focus on 
control -flow modelling and as such typically provide one -dimensional visual support, smarter process design 
tools could provide modellers  with dynamically generated  alternat e views of a pr ocess. given the fact that for a 
large majority of business processes, cost  savings  is one of the key discussion  points between higher -level 
management and business (process) analysts, there exists a specific need to develop tools and techniques that 
allow  linking of various elements of process models with cost information. such considerations might consist of 
emphasis ing expensive decisions, expensive paths, costs asso ciated with rework, cancellations, undesired 
outcomes, etc. this functionality would enha nce human interpretation , which would yield easier and better 
informed communication and discussion about desired characteristics.  
cost -informed design decisions.  in addition to cost information -based visual support, supplementary 
automated reasoning techn iques that support process design decisions from a cost perspective are deemed 
worthwhile. in this context, it could be investigated how for instance process simulation techniques  (van der 
aalst et al. 2010 ) could provide more in -depth knowledge about desi gn choices among different process 
variants. eventually , the availability of techniques that can assess the cost impact of design decisions  will 
improve  the accuracy of process design choices.  
process implementation: a cost -aware process execution environm ent 
true cost -aware process execution poses a couple of critical challenges to the implementation of a bpms. first, 
the various elements of a process such as activities and resources should be associated with relevant cost data 
and cost -based rules. second , a variety of cost calculations should be made possible at runtime for process 
instances and their associated activity instances, for instance time-based  calculations (e.g. , salary costs for the 
time a human resource spends on work item execution), usage -based  (e.g., payment of a set fee for an expert 24th australasian conference on information systems  cost-aware bpm : a research agenda  
4-6 dec 2013, melbourne  wynn  et al.   
witness), measurement -based  (e.g., per tonne costs of a raw material s), invocation -based  (e.g., costs incurred  in 
retooling an assembly line for a product run), fixed cost  (e.g., overhead cost s of commencing an activity), or any 
combination of the above. finally, such a bpms should facilitate the logging of cost data and allocate the data  to 
the correct  process artefacts, which allow these costs to be incorporated in event logs.  
process enactment: cost -aware o perational support  
in order to make cost -informed decisions during process execution, there is a need for bpmss  to support cost -
based process variant selections , cost -informed activity decisions a nd cost-informed resource allocation 
decisions at runtime . these needs require a bpms to support different types of cost-informed system -initiated 
actions or by resource -initiated interactions with the system.  cost-informed operational support can be defined 
as the ability to use cost information of the current pro cess instance together with cost information of previous 
instances to provide better decision support at runtime. in addition to simple dashboard -like monitoring 
functionality , the bpms should also be enhanced with techniques that allow for answering more complex 
prediction and recommendation queries.   
process diagnosis: process -driven cost reporting  and forecasting  
cost reports are the key artefact in the management accounting domain, providing different views (i.e., process, 
resource, organisational/depar tmental) of cost data. pais s are also a source of valuable information for creating 
cost reports, as their execution logs typically contain fine -grained details about activity execution times, resource 
utilisation, etc. accordingly, a particular research c hallenge is to investigate how the traditional management 
accounting practice of cost reporting can be improved or enhanced by making use of process -related data 
available in event logs.  
customisable , process -driven  cost report generation.  considering tha t there are no standardised cost 
reporting formats, management accountants typically tailor their reports to the applied accounting technique 
(e.g., abc, tdabc, or rca) as well as to their target audience. for instance, the practice of cost reporting 
often  requires appropriate filtering and simplification based on organisational, time, resource, and other 
perspectives. accordingly, it is a distinct challenge to develop a holistic framework for generating such 
customisable cost reports while making use of ev ent logs. we also envis age that by incorporating the cost 
perspective into bpms , the resulting cost -aware business process management systems should create 
opportunities to reduce the effort required to create such reports.  
process -driven cost forecasting.  in addition to cost reporting, the management accounting discipline provides 
value to an organisation's management with cost forecasts. where cost reports typically reflect an analysis of 
historical costing data, cost forecasts project these figures into the future. again, cost -aware bpms s may  be 
equipped with co st forecasting techniques that directly  take into account process characteristics,  including 
resource consumption , throughput times, etc. as such, with the association of process and accounting 
information, operational decision -making can be improved with more accurate and timely forecasts.  
cost -informed  process improvement . cost has already been used as a measure for evaluating the impact of 
process improvements. taking this one step further, proce ss improvement m ethodologies that explore more cost -
optimal execution scenarios, for instance based on fine -grained event logs that capture the process execution 
data in a sufficient level of detail , can be developed . as such, cost information may be  direc tly taken into 
account in the process improvement stage, which will enhance the identification of and discussion about 
potential process improvements . 
initial research outcomes  and realisations  
this section provides an overview of the initial  research outc omes of approaches to addressing some of the 
research challenges discussed in the previous section , with a view towards advancing the general research 
agenda presented . first and foremost, a fundamental mapping that  associate s costs to bpm artefacts called  a cost 
model is proposed. in addition, our approach to address research challenges in the enactment and the 
implementation phases has been realised within the yawl workflow environment (ter hofstede et al. 2010) . a 
first realisation of techniques to suppo rt research challenges related to the diagnosis phase has been developed as 
part of the prom process mining framework (verbeek et al. 2010).  research challenges related to the process 
design phase remain  as future work.  
cost model : associating  costs to  bpm artefacts  
informed by r equirements gathered from domain experts and a literature study of costing techni ques such as 
abc, tdabc and rca , a conceptual data model  for cost models  was designed  (wynn et al. 2013b ). this 
model specifies how cost information can be associated with business process artefacts by making use of three 24th australasian conference on information systems  cost-aware bpm : a research agenda  
4-6 dec 2013, melbourne  wynn  et al.   
core elements, namely cost drivers, cost functions, and mappings. a cost driver defines how cost is associated 
with one or more process elements (resource, activity, and case data) an d the cost rate. the d ata attributes of cost  
drivers  could be as simple or as complex as an organisation requires it to be. for instance, it could be a variable 
cost that describes the hourly rate of a resource, but it could also be a dynamic scheme that t ies overhead costs to 
each case depending on seasonal factors that i ncur more costs to work on activities when they are associated at 
busy times , or a combination of such cost rates. a cost driver may also specify  the cost technique associated with 
the dri ver (e.g., abc, tdabc or rca) and the cost type (e.g., fixed/variable, materials, overhead, or labour). 
the allocation of cost to process elements is kept flexible , putting few restrictions on the way incurred costs can 
be represented . a cost function defi nes a formula for aggregating various cost elements. it is possible to specify 
cost functions that incorporate both fixed and variable cost components. a mapping provides a way to relate 
terms used in management accounting to terms used in a bpms.  for inst ance, in the home loan process 
described above, the cost associated with “prepare loan documents” is a variable cost depending on the 
seniority of the employee who performs the activity and the time it takes for that resource to perform the activity.  
cost-aware process implementation and enactment in yawl  
a conceptual framework for a cost -aware bpms with support for cost -driven process enactment has been  
developed  that considers, in general, a ny bpms  or workflow system  can be equipped with a specific, discr ete 
component, a cost component or module , which  handles all cost -based information and performs system -
initiated cost -informed  decisions  (wynn et al, 2013a) . figure 4 shows a high -level architecture  of such an 
approach, where  the cost component would rece ive notifications from, and interact with, a process 
enactment/workflow engine at runtime, annotate process logs with calculated cost data, access the cost -enriched 
process logs for historical cost information, and perform the necessary calculations to ena ble cost -informed 
operational support  (wynn et al., 2013a ). a first implementation of such a component  has been  developed for  
the yawl system . the cost service  provides two interfaces: one which receives notifications from the 
workflow engine and participa ting services at various points in the life -cycle of a process instance, and the other 
which allows the engine and services to query cost -information, either to request a calculation and have the 
result returned, or to have returned a complete cost -annotat ed log of a process instance (or instances). examples 
of such functionalities include:  providing real -time calculated values for use as input into branching predicates; 
continuously monitoring for cost overruns and, when detected, manually or dynamically s kipping unnecessary or 
low priority work item(s), or cancelling work item(s) and/or case(s); and notifying administrators when cost 
thresholds are being approached. also, t he yawl resource service has been extended with cost-based 
resource allocation strat egies such as cheapest resource, cheapest to start,  and cheapest completer .  
cost diagnosis  in prom  
cost -annotated event logs.  process diagnosis activities often rely on event logs reflecting how processes were 
actually executed. a cost -annotated event log  is one where events recorded in a log are enriched with detailed 
cost information related to each event.  cost models can be used to augment  such event logs with cost 
information. in order to standardise the way costs are associated with event logs, a “cos t” extension for the xes 
event log format has been developed  and published as a standard extension by the ieee taskforce on process 
mining1. a cost annotation  is an association between a case or a task instance within a case and its cost (e.g., 
calculated based on the cost drivers/functions within a cost model). a prom cost annotation plug -in has been  
developed to enable annotation of  an event log with cost information supplied from a cost model.  
process -driven cost reporting.  a second outcome with respect  to process diagnosis consists of the 
development of a framework for the automated generation of management accounting -style cost reports. this 
framework has been implemented as a series of prom cost reporting plug -ins. costs associated with a set of 
proce ss executions can be visualised by means of tables, charts and graphs. furthermore, the tool can produce 
reports that aggregate cost information according to case, cost type, task, or resource  attribute s. customised 
resource cost reports in a tabular forma t can be generated through the use of  different xslt templates.  
process -driven cost forecasting.  the prom cost prediction plug -in represents an  initial approach to process -
driven cost forecasting . the prototype implementation  allows for predicting the tot al cost of running cases based 
on the state of the current instance and the cost information known for already completed cases of the process. 
the transition system approach proposed in (van der aalst et al. 2011) to predict the completion time for 
running  cases (time prediction) has been extended to realise cost forecasting/prediction. the plug -in uses the 
cost-annotated log to generate a transition system that can then be used for cost prediction  (see wynn et al., 
2013c for details) . 
                                                           
1 http://w ww.xes -standard .org/cost.xesext  24th australasian conference on information systems  cost-aware bpm : a research agenda  
4-6 dec 2013, melbourne  wynn  et al.   
 
figure 4. a general ised high-level cost -support architecture.  
cost -informed log analysis. an ongoing research project is concerne d with the development of log analysis 
techniques that make use of detailed cost information for process improvement . in general, the problem can be 
describe d as searching for alternative execution scenarios with the main questions being: “could we have 
executed a certain business process at a significantly lower total cost, taking into account that certain 
characteristics are invariable? if yes, wh at is that  cost and how can this be achieved?”  answering these questions 
involves the development of quantitative techniques that are capable of exploring the environment created from 
the aggregation of cost information and process execution data.  prelimin ary research has been conducted 
regarding the specification of the search space for cost -optim ised execution scenarios. two important el ements 
were identified. first, cost models will need to be enhanced with trade -offs that reflect certain choices that we re 
made implicitly during process execution. these trade -offs are essential in order to avoid trivial cost reduction 
strategies such as postponing all activities until the cheapest resource becomes available. other typical trade -offs 
can be resource -driven , for instance avoiding under - or over -utilis ation, or sla -driven , such as costs associated 
with deadline transgressions or quality failures. second, it was found that the search space for finding cost -
optim ised execution scenarios would often be extremely  large. therefore, a smart configuration of constraints 
and intelligent algorithmic techniques such as genetic algorithms or simulated annealing are required to make the 
solving of  such optimis ation problems feasible. in addition, utilising well -known work  assignment polic ies as a 
starting point for the evaluation of cost -informed process improvement strategies is being explored.  
related work  and conclusion  
in this paper, we advocate for the full integration of a cost perspective in each phase  of the bpm l ife cycle and 
present research challenges that need to be addressed in order to realise this vision. although, to the best of our 
knowledge, there is no such comprehensive research agenda covering all life cycle  phases, the interrelationships 
between proce sses, resources and cost are well -recognised in the accounting literature, e.g., in the reports 
produced by the ifac (2009) as well as in the process improvement literature, e.g., kettinger  et al. (1997),  
reijers and mansar (2005) , and netjes et al. (2009) .  
since the introduction of erp systems, a number of studies have been conducted on the effects of erp systems 
on traditional management accounting practices  (e.g., booth et al. 2000).  a survey  by kettinger et al. (1997) 
points out that activity based cos ting (abc) (cooper and kaplan 1988) is an often employed technique in the 
evaluation of business process re -engineering efforts.   
furthermore, w e leverage upon existing work in the bpm domain. an information model to link the aris 
accounting structure with  event driven process chains (epc s) proposed in (vom  brocke  et al. 2011) can be 
used as a starting point for linking cost with a process model during the design phase. the ability to visualise  
process models from different angles and different levels of gr anularity has been advocated throughout the bpm 
discipline ( e.g., brown and rasmussen 2010 ). in the area of process m ining, this topic has received wide  
attention , given the natural fit between process discovery and “maps” (van  der aalst  2009). the work by  vom 
brocke et al. (2010 ), which proposes a framework for measuring the economic value of processes with a view to 
assist in process redesign activities is applicable to cost -informed process (re)design and improvement 
challenges.  vintila et al. (2011 ) also propose  a framework for enterprise systems to have a closer alignment 
between processes and accounting records for monitoring and reporting purposes.  xi et al. (2008) explored how 
role-based resource allocation strategies can take into account the cost r ates of resources for a more optimal 
allocation mechanism.  finally, e xisting work in the area of process mining (va n der aalst 2011) on log analysi s 24th australasian conference on information systems  cost-aware bpm : a research agenda  
4-6 dec 2013, melbourne  wynn  et al.   
of different perspectives (e.g., control, organisational, case, and time) is highly relevant to address ing the 
research challenges around detailed cost reporting, cost forecasting and cost prediction.  
we believe many organisations can benefit from having real -time process -based cost information at their 
fingertips during  the design,  implementation, enactment, and diagnosis  phases of a business process's life cycle.  
explicit modelling and visualisation of process -related costs, the provision of cost -informed guidance in the 
redesign of processes, the ability to monitor and predict costs in active business proces ses, and the ability to 
carry out cost -informed analysis will yield innovations in the theory and practice of business process 
management. by creating a direct link between process management and cost management through the use of 
process models and event logs, the cost -aware bpm framework makes it possible for organisations to make cost 
informed strategic and operational decisions. in order to achieve the benefits of such a framework, it is necessary 
that an organisation maintains accurate cost data and al so keeps track of the process behaviours in the form of 
event logs.    
references  
van der aalst, w.m.p. 2009. “using process mining to generate accurate and interactive business process maps,”  
business information systems workshops , pp 1 -14.  
van der aalst , w.m.p., nakatumba, j., rozinat, a., and russell n. 2010. “business process simulation,” 
handbook on bpm 1 , pp 313 -338.  
van der aalst, w.m.p. 2011. process mining: discovery, conformance and enhancement of business 
processes . springer -verlag, berlin -heid elberg.  
van der aalst, w.m.p., schonenberg, m.h, and song, m. 2011. “time prediction based on process mining,” 
information systems  (36:2), pp 450 -475. 
van der aalst, w.m.p., ter hofstede, a.h.m., and weske, m. 2003. “business process management: a survey,”  
business process management , pp. 1 -12. 
booth,  p., matolcsy,  z. and wieder.  b. 2000. “ the impacts of enterprise resource planning systems on 
accounting practice -the australian experience ,” australian accounting review  (10:22), pp 4-18. 
brand n, and van der  kolk h. 1995. workfl ow analysis and design.  deventer:  kluwer bedrijfswetenschappen.  
vom brocke, j., sonnenberg, c., and baumoel, u. 2011. “linking accounting and process -aware information 
systems - towards a generalized information model for process -orien ted accounting,” ecis , pp 1 -13. 
vom brocke, j , recker, j. , and mendling, j . 2010.  “value -oriented process modeling : integrating financial 
perspectives into business process re -design”. business process management journal , (16:2), pp 333-356. 
brown, r.  and rasmussen, r.  2010.  “virtual environment visualisation of executable business process models ”. 
in rao, raghavendra (ed.) virtual technologies for business and industrial applications: innovative and 
synergistic approaches.  business science reference . 
chung , l. nixon, b., yu, e. and mylopoulos. j. 2000. non-functional requirements in software engineering.  
kluwer.  
cooper , r., and kaplan, r.s. 1988.  “measure costs right: make the right decisions ,” harvard business review , 
september – october, pp. 96-103. 
dumas , m., van der aalst , w.m.p. , and  ter hofstede , a.h.m. 2005 . “process -aware information systems: 
bridging people and software through process technology ”. john wiley  & sons, inc., new y ork, ny, usa . 
ter hofstede, a.h.m., van der aalst, w.m.p., adams, m., an d russell, n. 2010. modern business process 
automation: yawl and its support environment. springer.  
international federation of accountants (ifac), professional accountants in business committee. 2009. 
“evaluating the costing journey: a costing levels cont inuum maturity model.” retrieved 4 july, 2013, from 
http://www.ifac.org/publications -resources/evaluating -costing -journey -costing -levels -continuum -maturity -model  
kaplan, r. s., and anderson, s. r. 2007.  “time -driven activity -based costing: a simpler and more powerful 
path to higher profits ”. harvard business press.  
kaplan, r.s., and atkinson, a.a. 1998. advanced management accountin g. prentice hall, new jersey, usa.  
kettinger, w.j., teng, j.t.c., and guha, s. 1997. “business process change: a study of methodologies, 
techniques, and tools,” mis quarterly  (21:1), pp 55 -80. 24th australasian conference on information systems  cost-aware bpm : a research agenda  
4-6 dec 2013, melbourne  wynn  et al.   
keys, d.e., and merwe, a. 2001. “the case for rca: excess and i dle capacity,” journal of cost management  
(15:4), pp 21 -32. 
netjes, m. and reijers, h., and van der aalst, w.  2009.  “on the formal generation of process redesigns ”. in 
business process management workshops , pp 224–235. springer.  
reijers, h.a., and mansar, s.l. 2005. “best practices in business process redesign: an overview and qualitative 
evaluation of successful redesign heuristics,” omega  (33:4), pp 283 -306. 
verbeek, h.m.w. , buijs,  j., van dongen , b.f. , and van der aalst , w.m.p. 2010 . “prom 6:  the process  mining 
toolkit ,” proc. of bpm demonstration track  (615), pp 34-39. 
vintila , c., c ornescu, a., and costin , s. (2011). “aligning the core business area behavior with non -core 
business area behavior by synchronizing business operations with accounting record s, using a business 
process management system. ” review of international comparative management , (12:2), pp 274-281. 
weske , m. 2007 . business process management: concepts, languages, architectures.  springer -verlag, new 
york, inc., secaucus, nj, usa . 
white , l. 2009 . “resource consumption accounting: manager -focused management ac counting ,” journal of 
corporate accounting & finance  (20:4), pp 63-77. 
wynn, m.t., reijers, h.a., adams, m., ouyang, c., ter hofstede, a.h.m., van der aalst,  w.m.p. , rosemann , 
m., and  hoque , z. 2013a.  “cost -informed operational process support,” proceedings of 32nd international 
conference on conceptual modelling, (er 2013)  (short paper) , hong kong, springer . 
wynn, m.t., low, w.z., and nauta, w. 2013 b. “a framework for cost -aware proces s management: generation 
of accurate and timely management accounting cost reports,” proceedings of conferences in research and 
practice in information technology (crpit) , australian computer society, inc.  
wynn, m.t., low, w.z., ter hofstede, a.h.m, and nauta, w. 2013c. “a framework for cost -aware process 
management: cost reporting and cost prediction ,” journal of universal computer science  special issue : 
conceptual modelling with specific focus on service -oriented systems  (in press, accepted 14 sep 2013) . 
xu, j., liu, c. and zhao, x. 2008. “resource allocation vs. business process improvement: how they impact 
on each other” , proceedings of the bpm conference , pp 228-243, lncs  vol. 5240 , springer.  
acknowledgem ents  
this work is supported by an arc discovery g rant with number dp120101624.  we would like to thank prof. 
zahirul hoque for his input to the research project on cost -aware bpm.  
copyright  
[wynn et al] © 2013. the authors assign to acis and educational and non -profit institutions a non -exclusive 
licence  to use this document for personal use and in courses of instruction provided that the article is used in full 
and this copyright statement is reproduced. the authors also grant a non -exclusive licence to acis to publish 
this document in full in the confer ence papers and proceedings. those documents may be published on the 
world wide web, cd -rom, in printed form, and on mirror sites on the world wide web. any other usage is 
prohibited without the express permission of the authors.  
 