report from dagstuhl seminar 13481
unleashing operational process mining
edited by
rafael accorsi1, ernesto damiani2, and wil van der aalst3
1 universität freiburg, de, rafael.accorsi@iig.uni-freiburg.de
2 università degli studi di milano – crema, it, ernesto.damiani@unimi.it
3 eindhoven university of technology, nl, w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tue.nl
abstract
this report documents the program and the outcomes of dagstuhl seminar 13481 “unleashing
operational process mining”. process mining is a young research discipline connecting compu-
tational intelligence and data mining on the one hand and process modeling and analysis on
the other hand. the goal of process mining is to discover, monitor, diagnose and improve real
processes by extracting knowledge from event logs readily available in today’s information sys-
tems. process mining bridges the gap between data mining and business process modeling and
analysis. the seminar that took place november 2013 was the ﬁrst in its kind. about 50 process
mining experts joined forces to discuss the main process mining challenges and present cutting
edge results. this report aims to describe the presentations, discussions, and ﬁndings.
seminar 25.–29. november, 2013 – www.dagstuhl.de/13481
1998 acm subject classiﬁcation h.2.8 database applications (data mining), h.2.1 logical
design (data models), k.6 management of computing and information systems
keywords and phrases process mining, big data, conformance checking
digital object identiﬁer 10.4230/dagrep.3.11.154
1 executive summary
rafael accorsi
ernesto damiani
wil van der aalst
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©rafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst
society shifted from being predominantly “analog” to “digital” in just a few years. this has
had an incredible impact on the way we do business and communicate. gartner uses the
phrase “the nexus of forces” to refer to the convergence and mutual reinforcement of four
interdependent trends: social, mobile, cloud, and information. the term “big data” is often
used to refer to the incredible growth of data in recent years. however, the ultimate goal is
not to collect more data, but to turn data into real value. this means that data should be
used to improve existing products, processes and services, or enable new ones.
event data are the most important source of information. events may take place inside a
machine (e.g., an x-ray machine or baggage handling system), inside an enterprise information
system (e.g., an order placed by a customer), inside a hospital (e.g., the analysis of a blood
sample), inside a social network (e.g., exchanging e-mails or twitter messages), inside a
transportation system (e.g., checking in, buying a ticket, or passing through a toll booth),
etc.
except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
under a creative commons by 3.0 unported license
unleashing operational process mining, dagstuhl reports , vol. 3, issue 11, pp. 154–192
editors: rafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst
dagstuhl reports
schloss dagstuhl – leibniz-zentrum für informatik, dagstuhl publishing, germanyrafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 155
current 
datahistoric 
data
resources/
organizationdata/rulescontrol-flowde jure models
resources/
organizationdata/rulescontrol-flowde facto modelsexplore
predict
recommend
detect
check
compare
promote
discover
enhance
diagnosecartography navigation auditingevent logs
models“pre 
mortem”“post 
mortem”
figure 1 overview of the diﬀerent process mining tasks (taken from “process mining: discovery,
conformance and enhancement of business processes”).
process mining aims to discover, monitor and improve real processes by extracting
knowledge from event logs readily available in today’s information systems1. the starting
point for process mining is an event log . each event in such a log refers to an activity(i.e., a
well-deﬁned step in some process) and is related to a particular case(i.e., aprocess instance ).
the events belonging to a case are orderedand can be seen as one “run” of the process.
event logs may store additional information about events. in fact, whenever possible, process
mining techniques use extra information such as the resource (i.e., person or device) executing
or initiating the activity, the timestamp of the event, or data elements recorded with the
event (e.g., the size of an order).
event logs can be used to conduct three types of process mining. the ﬁrst type of process
mining is discovery . a discovery technique takes an event log and produces a model without
using any a-priori information. process discovery is the most prominent process mining
technique. for many organizations it is surprising to see that existing techniques are indeed
able to discover real processes merely based on example behaviors stored in event logs. the
second type of process mining is conformance . here, an existing process model is compared
with an event log of the same process. conformance checking can be used to check if reality,
as recorded in the log, conforms to the model and vice versa. the third type of process
mining is enhancement . here, the idea is to extend or improve an existing process model
thereby using information about the actual process recorded in some event log. whereas
conformance checking measures the alignment between model and reality, this third type
of process mining aims at changing or extending the a-priori model. for instance, by using
timestamps in the event log one can extend the model to show bottlenecks, service levels,
and throughput times.
process mining algorithms have been implemented in various academic and commercial
1process mining: discovery, conformance and enhancement of business processes by w.m.p. van der
aalst, springer verlag, 2011 (isbn 978-3-642-19344-6).
13481156 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
systems. the corresponding tools are being increasingly relevant in industry and have
proven to be essential means to meet business goals. prom is the de facto standard plat-
form for process mining in the academic world. examples of commercial tools are disco
(fluxicon), perceptive process mining (before futura reﬂect and bpm|one), qpr processan-
alyzer, aris process performance manager, celonis discovery, interstage process discovery
(fujitsu), discovery analyst (stereologic), and xmanalyzer (xmpro). representatives of
prom community and the ﬁrst three commercial vendors participated in dagstuhl seminar
13481 “unleashing operational process mining”.
the dagstuhl seminar was co-organized with the ieee task force on process mining (see
http://www.win.tue.nl/ieeetfpm/). the goal of this task force is to promote the research,
development, education and understanding of process mining. sixty organizations and over
one hundred experts have joined forces in the ieee task force on process mining.
next to some introductory talks (e.g., an overview of the process mining ﬁeld by wil van
der aalst), 31 talks where given by the participants. the talks covered the entire process
mining spectrum, including:
from theory to applications,
from methodological to tool-oriented,
from data quality to new analysis techniques,
from big data to semi-structured data,
from discovery to conformance,
from health-care to security, and
from oﬀ-line to online.
the abstracts of all talks are included in this report.
it was remarkable to see that all participants (including the academics) were very
motivated to solve real-life problems and considered increasing the adoption of process
mining as one of the key priorities, thereby justifying the title and spirit of the seminar,
namely “unleashing the power of process mining”. this does not imply that there are
not many foundational research challenges. for example, the increasing amounts of event
data are creating many new challenges and new questions have emerged. such issues were
discussed both during the sessions and on informal meetings during the breaks and at the
evening.
half of the program was devoted to discussions on a set of predeﬁned themes. these topics
were extracted based on a questionnaire ﬁlled out by all participants before the seminar.
1.process mining of multi-perspective models (chair: akhil kumar)
2.data quality and data preparation (chair: frank van geﬀen)
3.process discovery: playing with the representational bias (josep carmona)
4.evaluation of process mining algorithms: benchmark data sets and conformance metrics
(chair: boudewijn van dongen)
5.advanced topics in process discovery: on-the-ﬂy and distributed process discovery (chair:
alessandro sperduti)
6.process mining and big data (chair: marcello leida)
7.process mining in healthcare (chair: pnina soﬀer)
8.security and privacy issues in large process data sets (chair: simon foley, replacing
günter müller)
9.conformance checking for security, compliance and auditing (chair: massimiliano de
leoni, replacing marco montali)
10.how to sell process mining? (chair: anne rozinat)rafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 157
11.what is the ideal tool for an expert user? (chair: benoit depaire)
12.what is the ideal tool for a casual business user? (chair: teemu lehto)
summaries of all discussions are included in this report. the chairs did an excellent job in
guiding the discussions. after the each discussion participants had a better understanding of
the challenges that process mining is facing. this deﬁnitely include many research challenges,
but also challenges related to boosting the adoption of process mining in industry.
the social program was rich and vivid, including an exclusion to trier’s christmas market,
a night walk to ruins, table football, table tennis, and late night discussions.
next to this report, a tangible output of the seminar is a special issue of ieee transactions
on services computing based on the seminar. this special issue has the title “processes meet
big data” and will be based on contributions from participants of this seminar (also open to
others). this special issue of ieee transaction on service-oriented computing is intended to
create an international forum for presenting innovative developments of process monitoring,
analysis and mining over service-oriented architectures, aimed at handling “big logs” and
use them eﬀectively for discovery, dash-boarding and mining. the ultimate objective is to
identify the promising research avenues, report the main results and promote the visibility
and relevance of this area.
overall, the seminar was very successful. most participants encouraged the organizers
to organize another dagstuhl seminar on process mining. several suggestions were given
for such a future seminar, e.g., providing event logs for competitions and complementary
types of analysis before or during the seminar. these recommendations were subject of the
discussion sessions, whose summaries can be found below.
13481158 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
2 table of contents
executive summary
rafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154
overview of talks
knowledge and business intelligence technologies in cross-enterprise environments
(kite.it)
antonio caforio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
to unleash, or not to unleash, that is the question!
josep carmona . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
mining collaboration in business process
paolo ceravolo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
agile process mining?
jonathan cook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162
sesar lab activities
ernesto damiani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
building better simulation models with process mining
benoit depaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
mining the unknown security frontier from system logs
simon n. foley . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
beyond tasks and gateways: towards rich bpmn process mining
luciano garcia-banuelos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
working with bpmn in prom
anna a. kalenkova . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
benchmarking process mining algorithms on noisy data: does log sanitization
help?
akhil kumar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
analytics for case management and other semi-structured environments
geetika t. lakshmanan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
continuous data-driven business process improvement for sap order to cash
process
teemu lehto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
qpr processanalyzer (tool demo)
teemu lehto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
big data techniques for process monitoring
marcello leida . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
process mining and bigdata
marcello leida . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
on the suitability of process mining to produce current-state role-based access
control models
maria leitner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167rafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 159
declarative process mining with prom
fabrizio maria maggi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
scientiﬁc workﬂows within the process mining domain
ronny s. mans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 168
conformance analysis of inventory processes using process mining
zbigniew paszkiewicz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 168
predictive security analysis@runtime – lessons learnt from adaptation to indus-
trial scenarios
roland rieke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
data collection, integration, and cleaning for process mining: reﬂections on some
projects
stefanie rinderle-ma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
disco (tool demo)
anne rozinat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
dpmine/p complex experiment model markup language as applied to prom
sergey a. shershakov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
a process mining-based analysis of intentional noncompliance
pnina soﬀer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
outpatient process analysis with process mining: a case study
minseok song . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
prompt: process mining for business process improvement
alessandro sperduti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
secsy: security-aware synthesis of process event logs
thomas stocker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
prom 6.3 (tool demo)
eric verbeek . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
process mining in china - recent work on event quality
jianmin wang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
turning event logs into process movies: animating what has really happened
massimiliano de leoni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
introducing process mining at rabobank
frank van geﬀen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
discussion sessions
discussion session 1: process mining of multi-perspective models . . . . . . . . . 174
discussion session 2: data quality and data preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
discussion session 3: process discovery: playing with the representaional bias . . 177
discussion session 4: evaluation of process mining algorithms: benchmark data
sets and conformance metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
discussion session 5: advanced topics in process discovery: on-the-ﬂy and
distributed process discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
discussion session 6: process mining and big data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181
13481160 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
discussion session 7: process mining in health-care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183
discussion session 8: security and privacy issues in large process data sets . . . 184
discussion session 9: conformance checking for security, compliance and auditing 185
discussion session 10: how to sell process mining? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 187
discussion session 11: what is the ideal tool for an expert user? . . . . . . . . . 188
discussion session 12: what is the ideal tool for a casual business user? . . . . . 189
participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 192rafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 161
3 overview of talks
3.1 knowledge and business intelligence technologies in
cross-enterprise environments (kite.it)
antonio caforio (university of salento, it)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©antonio caforio
main reference l. fischer (ed.), “delivering competitive advantage through bpm – real-world business process
management,” excellence in practice series, isbn 978-0-9849764-5-4, future strategies inc., 2012.
urlhttp://futstrat.com/books/competitiveadvantage.php
in this talk antonio caforio described the work ongoing in an italian industrial research
project, knowledge and business intelligence technologies in cross-enterprise environments
(kite.it), that aims to support the creation and management of processes in the value
networks (vn). the main project outcomes are methodologies and platforms to enable the
alignment of processes with the organizations’ goals in the vn and the measurement of the
vn eﬀectiveness. a focus will be made on the aeroengine maintenance, repair and overhaul
(mro) and its main overhaul process to understand how process mining can help improve
the management of this process.
3.2 to unleash, or not to unleash, that is the question!
josep carmona (upc – barcelona, es)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©josep carmona
in this talk josep carmona introduced two very diﬀerent approaches for unleashing (or not)
process mining, that are being developed in my group. the ﬁrst one, based on the use of
portfolio-based algorithm selection techniques, is devoted to guide the application of process
mining algorithms by using a recommender system. the second one, totally opposed to
the ﬁrst, aims at providing a process-oriented computing environment for the exploration
and creation of process mining algorithms. these two approaches are meant to cover a
wide variety of process mining practices and, together with existing frameworks, oﬀer a new
perspective to the ﬁeld.
3.3 mining collaboration in business process
paolo ceravolo (university of milan, it)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©paolo ceravolo
main reference f. frati, i. seeber, “copra: a tool for coding and measuring communication in teams,” in proc.
of the 7th ieee int’l conf. on digital ecosystems and technologies (dest’13), pp. 43–48, ieee,
2013.
urlhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1109/dest.2013.6611327
observing the evolution of several research programs focusing on collaborating communities,
we encounter a call for diachronic analysis. it follows that process mining can contribute in
reﬁning and enriching the next generation of these studies. in whatever way, this implies
to understand the research questions that are driving the analysis on collaborative process
13481162 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
to then identify the challenges for evolving process mining techniques. in this talk, paolo
ceravolo looked back on the evolution of some area related to collaborative process and
pointing out open issue and interesting research directions.
3.4 agile process mining?
jonathan cook (new mexico state university, us)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©jonathan cook
joint work of cook, jonathan; bani-hani, imad
agile software development methodologies are in some sense a reaction to overly prescriptive
development processes, and to a large extent desired to throw out a strict process model and
move the team collaboration and project management oﬀ the computer and make it human
centric. thus we see management tools such as white boards with sticky notes being used to
manage the project. can such a process be mined eﬀectively? we argue yes, because agile
methodologies still embody practices that should result in some regular, observable patterns
of behavior or at least constraints over what activities take place when. for some examples,
test driven design should show itself in the activity of creating a test case (or more) before a
feature is implemented; time-boxed iteration should show itself in very regular release tagging;
continuous integration should show itself in regular feature merges into the main build; and
refactoring should show itself in particular code edit patterns or commit messages. knowing
the process (or practices) that a project team is performing will help them in assessing their
own agility and potentially show them areas where they could improve. beyond the set of
recommended practices, agile processes should be ﬂexible; thus very closed-form control-ﬂow
process mining algorithms should probably not work well on an agile process (and if they do,
it may not be very agile). open model mining algorithms such as declareminer, which infers
particular ltl rule patterns, should be much more suitable for agile process mining. other
aspects of process mining, such as role mining, organizational structure mining, and social
network mining may help in agile process mining; for example, an agile team may have a goal
to be as interactive and collaborative as possible, sharing duties equally, but in practice they
may slip into very speciﬁc roles without realizing it. finally, before pursuing agile process
mining, we are creating qualitative methods (e.g., a questionnaire) for measuring the agility
of a process, and have deﬁned ﬁve dimensions over which to measure agility: team (level of
interaction and collaboration practices); customer (level of customer involvement); iteration
(level of true iterative practices); testing (level of test-centric practices); and design (level of
ongoing refactoring eﬀort). in this talk, jon cook asked 3–6 questions in each area and then
create a radial chart showing the level of agility for each dimension and giving a visualization
of overall agility.rafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 163
3.5 sesar lab activities
ernesto damiani (università degli studi di milano – crema, it)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©ernesto damiani
secure service-oriented architectures research (sesar) lab within the computer science
department of the università degli studi di milano. the research activities are mainly
focused on the following subjects ranging from service-oriented architectures to knowledge
management over open source development paradigms and security. the staﬀ is composed
by full time professors, researchers, post-docs, phds and research collaborators. the
research activities are carried out in collaboration with italian and european partners, within
national and international research projects and agreements with enterprises. the lab oﬀers
to university students the chance to carry out degree theses, stages for the acknowledgment
of university credits, and the opportunity to participate to the activities carried out in each
research project, achieving experiences for the future work activities.
3.6 building better simulation models with process mining
benoit depaire (hasselt university – diepenbeek, be)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©benoit depaire
joint work of depaire, benoit; martin, niels; caris, an
simulation models are a useful tool to run complex what-if scenarios and to make informed
decisions. however, these simulation models are often constructed in a highly subjective
way (through interviews, documents how processes should be executed and guesstimates on
simulation parameters). in this talk benoit depaire argued that process mining holds the
tools and potential to construct more reliable simulation models. we presented a swot
analysis of business process simulation based on the current state of the art in literature,
presented a framework how simulation and process mining could be linked together and
identiﬁed diﬀerent challenges where the process mining community should focus on.
3.7 mining the unknown security frontier from system logs
simon n. foley (university college cork, ie)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©simon n. foley
joint work of foley, simon n.; pieczul, olgierd
the scale and complexity of modern computer systems has meant that it is becoming
increasingly diﬃcult and expensive to formulate eﬀective security policies and to deploy
eﬃcacious security controls. as a consequence, security compliance tends to focus on those
activities perceived to be critical, with an assumption that the other activities, known
or unknown, are not signiﬁcant. however, often it is these side-activities that can lead
to a security compromise of the system. while security controls provide monitoring and
enforcement of the critical activities related to the security policy, eﬀectively, little is known
about the nature of the other activities. our preliminary results show that such activities can
13481164 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
be modeled and do exist in real-world systems. in this talk, simon foley demonstrated how
process mining techniques can be explored in practice to discover and check for perturbations
to these activities in system logs.
3.8 beyond tasks and gateways: towards rich bpmn process mining
luciano garcia-banuelos (university of tartu, ee)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©luciano garcia-banuelos
duringthelastdecade, processminingtechniqueshavereachedacertainlevelofsophistication
and maturity, evidenced by the availability of a range of functional academic prototypes and
commercial tools in the ﬁeld. in parallel to these developments, bpmn has emerged as a
widely adopted standard for modeling and analyzing business processes. bpmn oﬀers a rich
set of constructs for modeling business processes in a structured way, including sub-processes
with interrupting and non-interrupting boundary events and multi-instance activities as
well as a comprehensive set of event types. surprisingly though, the bulk of research in
process mining in general, and automated process model discovery in particular, has focused
on the problem of discovering process models consisting purely of tasks and control-ﬂow
dependencies (in essence: tasks and some types of gateways). in this talk, luciano garcia-
banuelos presented his initial work on automated discovery of rich bpmn process models,
meaning process models that make use of the bpmn notation beyond its “task and gateways”
subset. he discussed initial achievements and key challenges he had identiﬁed so far.
3.9 working with bpmn in prom
anna a. kalenkova (nru higher school of economics – moscow, ru)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©anna a. kalenkova
prom is a tool for implementing and integrating process mining algorithms within a standard
environment. prom plugins support plenty of diﬀerent process model formats, among them
are petri nets, transition systems, casual nets, fuzzy models and others which are widely used
by researchers. but at the same time it might be rather diﬃcult for an inexperienced user (or
for an external customer) to estimate the result of applying process mining techniques and
understand the semantics of process models. this indicates that there is a need for prom
to support commonly known process modeling standards also. bpmn (business process
modeling notation) is a process modeling and executing notation understandable by a wide
audience of analytics and developers. representing process models in this standard way will
give an ability to bridge the gap between prom and variety of process modeling tools. also
bpmn gives a holistic view on the process model: bpmn diagrams could be enhanced with
roles, interactions, timers, conformance/performance info, etc. in her talk, anna kalenkova
gave an overview of prom functionality related to bpmn. import/export capabilities and
internal bpmn meta-model were discussed. also the plugins which implement conversions
from diﬀerent formalisms to bpmn and vice-versa were considered.rafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 165
3.10 benchmarking process mining algorithms on noisy data: does
log sanitization help?
akhil kumar (pennsylvania state university, us)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©akhil kumar
akhil kumar proposed a technique to sanitize noisy logs by ﬁrst building a classiﬁer on a
subset of the log and applying the classiﬁer rules to remove noisy traces from the log. the
technique is evaluated on synthetic logs from six benchmark models of increasing complexity
on both behavioral and structural recall and precision metrics. the results show that mined
models thus produced from sanitized log are superior on the evaluation metrics. they show
better ﬁdelity to the reference models and are more compact. the rule based approach
generalizes to any noise pattern. the rules can be explained and modiﬁed.
3.11 analytics for case management and other semi-structured
environments
geetika t. lakshmanan (ibm tj watson research center – cambridge, us)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©geetika t. lakshmanan
there is considerable scope for both predictive and descriptive analytics in case management
and other semi-structured environments. predictive analytics could provide guidance to a
case worker handling a current case instance on the likelihood of a future task occurrence
or attribute value. by training a classiﬁer such as a decision tree on a set of completed
case execution traces, the classiﬁer can be used to make predictions about the likelihood
of occurrence of a task execution or predict the value of a continuous variable in the case
such as time for a currently running case instance. descriptive analytics could be applied to
provide insight about correlations and patterns derived from historically completed instances
of a case. in order to be applied in a real world setting, these analytics require solving an
array of challenges. in addition to providing easily consumable results, these analytics have
to be highly conﬁdent of the predictions and correlations they compute. in her talk, geetika
lakshmanan provided an overview of the challenges of applying predictive and descriptive
analytics to case management and other real world settings.
3.12 continuous data-driven business process improvement for sap
order to cash process
teemu lehto (qpr software – helsinki, fi)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©teemu lehto
this talk was a business-driven case study for sharing experiences (1) sap is the leading
erp system globally measured by revenue. (2) sap creates great quality records for process
mining purposes. (3) order to cash is a critical importance business process for organizations.
(4) order to cash is not as systematic or optimized as one could think of.
13481166 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
3.13 qpr processanalyzer (tool demo)
teemu lehto (qpr software – helsinki, fi)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©teemu lehto
this talk is a demo of a commercial process mining tool qpr processanalyzer.
3.14 big data techniques for process monitoring
marcello leida (khalifa university – abu dhabi, ae)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©marcello leida
joint work of leida, marcello, andrej chu, basim majeed
main reference m. leida, a. chu, “distributed sparql query answering over rdf data streams,” in proc. of
2013 ieee int’l congress on big data (bigdata’13), pp. 369–378, ieee, 2013.
urlhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1109/bigdata.congress.2013.56
modern business process analysis requires an extremely ﬂexible data model and a platform
able to minimize response times as much as possible. in order to eﬃciently analyze a large
amount of data, this talk illustrated novel technologies that rely on an improved data model
supported by a grid infrastructure, allowing storing the data in-memory across many grid
nodes and distributing the workload, avoiding the bottleneck represented by constantly
querying a traditional database. both process data and domain knowledge are represented
using standard metadata formats: process logs are stored as rdf triples referring to company
speciﬁc activities. the data collected by the process log monitor is translated to a continuous
ﬂow of triples that capture the status of the processes. this continuous ﬂow of information
can be accessed through the sparql query language used to extract and analyze process
execution data. although the query engine has been developed as part of a business process
monitoring platform, it is a general purpose engine that can be used in any system that
requires scalable analysis of semantic data. the system presented has some unique features
such as grid-based infrastructure, extreme scalability, eﬃcient real-time query answering and
an on the ﬂy access control layer that were presented in detail during the talk.
3.15 process mining and bigdata
marcello leida (khalifa university – abu dhabi, ae)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©marcello leida
this discussion session focused on the various big data technologies and how can they be
applied to process mining area.rafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 167
3.16 on the suitability of process mining to produce current-state
role-based access control models
maria leitner (universität wien, at)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©maria leitner
joint work of leitner, maria; rinderle-ma, stefanie
main reference m. leitner, “delta analysis of role-based access control models,” in proc. of the 14th int’l conf. on
computer aided systems theory (eurocast’13), part i, lncs, vol. 8111, pp. 507–514,
springer, 2013.
urlhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-53856-8_64
role-based access control (rbac) is the de facto standard for access control in process-aware
information systems. with existing techniques in organizational mining, we can adapt
these to derive not only organizational models but also rbac models. in a case study, we
evaluated role derivation, role hierarchy mining, organizational mining, and staﬀ assignment
mining on the suitability to derive rbac models. we compared the derived models to the
original and evaluated the results with quantitative measures. furthermore, we adapted
delta analysis to the rbac domain to investigate the similarity of rbac models and to
analyze diﬀerences between the models. as an example, we analyzed the structural similarity
using error correcting graph matching. with this approach, we can not only identify rbac
misconﬁguration but also detect violations of the original rbac policy.
references
1maria leitner, anne baumgrass, sigrid schefer-wenzl, stefanie rinderle-ma, and mark
strembeck: a case study on the suitability of process mining to produce current-state
rbac models. business process management workshops. lnbip. springer, pp. 719–724
(2013)
2maria leitner: delta analysis of role-based access control models: proceedings of the
14th international conference on computer aided systems theory (eurocast 2013).
lncs. springer, pp. 507–514 (2013) (in press)
3.17 declarative process mining with prom
fabrizio maria maggi (university of tartu, ee)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©fabrizio maria maggi
the increasing availability of event data recorded by contemporary information systems
makes process mining a valuable instrument to improve and support business processes.
starting point for process mining is an event log. typically, three types of process mining
can be distinguished: (a) process discovery (learning a model from example traces in an
event log), (b) conformance checking (comparing the observed behavior in the event log with
the modeled behavior), and (c) model enhancement (extending models based on additional
information in the event logs, e.g., to highlight bottlenecks). existing process mining
techniques mainly use procedural process modeling languages for describing the business
processes under examination. however, these languages are suitable to be used in stable
environment where process executions are highly predictable. in turbulent environments,
where process executions involve multiple alternatives, process models tend to be complex
and diﬃcult to understand. in this talk, fabrizio maggi introduced a new family of process
mining techniques based on declarative languages. these techniques are very suitable to be
13481168 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
used for analyzing less structured business processes working in environments where high
ﬂexibility is required. these techniques have been implemented in the process mining tool
prom and range from process discovery to models repair and extension, to oﬄine and online
conformance checking.
3.18 scientiﬁc workﬂows within the process mining domain
ronny s. mans (eindhoven university of technology, nl)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©ronny s. mans
within the process mining domain there is currently no support for the construction and
execution of a workﬂow which describes all analysis steps and their order, i.e. a scientiﬁc
workﬂow. in the tool demo we demonstrated how we have integrated the scientiﬁc workﬂow
management system rapidminer with the process mining framework prom 6. that is, several
interesting workﬂows, consisting of multiple process mining tasks, will be constructed and
executed.
3.19 conformance analysis of inventory processes using process
mining
zbigniew paszkiewicz (poznan university of economics, pl)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©zbigniew paszkiewicz
case study: conformance analysis of inventory processes using process mining production
companies monitor deviations from the assumed procedures to satisfy quality requirements. in
his talk, zbigniew paszkiewicz showed how process mining contributes to quality management
eﬀortsbyanalysiseventlogsaboutinventoryoperationsregisteredinawarehousemanagement
system. the analyzed company has pointed six aspects to be scrutinized: 1. conforming to
model: inventory process instances must follow a pre-deﬁned de jure model; 2. first in first
out policy: products that were produced ﬁrst must be shipped ﬁrst; the fifo rule must be
satisﬁed within particular product families; 3. quality assurance: all the pallets before being
shipped to a client must be checked by the quality department; 4. process performance: a
particular pallet cannot be stored in the warehouse for more than fourteen days; additional
constraints concern the execution time of particular activities related to pallet management;
5. pallet damage handling: a pallet in disrepair must be transported to a special storage
area; all the storekeepers are responsible for handling damaged pallets in this way; 6. work
distribution: all the shifts should perform an equal amount of work; storekeepers taking
pallets from production lines should not be involved in their shipping from the warehouse,
and vice-versa. conformance checking analysis has been performed with both prom and
commercial tools. unwanted and repeatable parts of inventory processes in their business
contexts have been identiﬁed with our novel rmv method. unwanted and repeatable parts
are represented as activity patterns which encompass the deﬁnition of activities and social
relations among process participants. preliminary results conﬁrm that the rmv method
provides useful insights about collaboration among process participants.rafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 169
3.20 predictive security analysis@runtime – lessons learnt from
adaptation to industrial scenarios
roland rieke (fraunhofer sit – darmstadt, de)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©roland rieke
joint work of rieke, roland; repp, jürgen; zhdanova, maria; eichler, jörn
main reference r. rieke, j. repp, m. zhdanova, j. eichler, “monitoring security compliance of critical
processes,” in proc. of the 22th euromicro int’l conf. on parallel, distributed and network-based
processing (pdp’14), ieee cs, to appear.
the internet today provides the environment for novel applications and processes which
may evolve way beyond pre-planned scope and purpose. security analysis is growing in
complexity with the increase in functionality, connectivity, and dynamics of current electronic
business processes. technical processes within critical infrastructures also have to cope with
these developments. to tackle the complexity of the security analysis, the application of
models is becoming standard practice. however, model-based support for security analysis
is not only needed in pre-operational phases but also during process execution, in order
to provide situational security awareness at runtime. this talk given by roland rieke
presented an approach to support model-based evaluation of the security status of process
instances. in particular, challenges with respect to the assessment whether instances of
processes violate security policies or might violate them in the near future were addressed.
the approach is based on operational formal models derived from process speciﬁcations and
security compliance models derived from high-level security and safety goals. events from
process instances executed by the observed system are ﬁltered for their relevance to the
analysis and then mapped to the model of the originating process instance. the applicability
of the approach is exempliﬁed utilizing processes from several industrial scenarios. lessons
learnt from the adaptation of the method to the scenarios are addressed. in particular,
event model abstraction, process instance identiﬁcation, semi-automatic model mining, and
cross process instance reasoning is discussed. furthermore, the need for a method to derive
measurement requirements from security and dependability goals is motivated and a meta
model aiming at an integrated security strategy management is presented.
3.21 data collection, integration, and cleaning for process mining:
reﬂections on some projects
stefanie rinderle-ma (universität wien, at)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©stefanie rinderle-ma
joint work of rinderle-ma, stefanie; ly, linh thao; mangler, jürgen; indiono, conrad; dunkl, reinhold;
kriglstein, simone; wallner, günter; binder, michael; dorda, wolfgang; duftschmid, georg;
fröschl, karl anton; gall, walter; grossmann, wilfried; harmankaya, kaan; hronsky, milan;
rinner, christoph; weber, stefanie
main reference l. thao ly, c. indiono, j. mangler, s. rinderle-ma, “data transformation and semantic log
purging for process mining,” in proc. of the 24th int’l conf. on advanced information systems
engineering (caise’12), lncs, vol. 7328, pp. 238–253, springer, 2012.
urlhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-31095-9_16/
in this talk, stefanie rinderle-ma highlighted some process mining challenges from her own
projects. the ﬁrst project is ebmc2 which is a joint work between university of vienna
and medical university of vienna on patient treatment processes in skin cancer. the goal of
the project is to discover the actual treatment processes and compare them with skin cancer
13481170 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
guidelines in order to analyze possible deviations. though several data sources are available
several data integration and quality problems occur, e.g., with respect to activity granularity
and time. the second project is on higher education processes (hep) where we tried to
mine reference processes based on semantic log purging. finally, some results on visualizing
process diﬀerence graph including instance traﬃc are presented.
references
1michael binder, wolfgang dorda, georg duftschmid, reinhold dunkl, karl anton fröschl,
walter gall, wilfried grossmann, kaan harmankaya, milan hronsky, stefanie rinderle-
ma, christoph rinner, stefanie weber: on analyzing process compliance in skin cancer
treatment: an experience report from the evidence-based medical compliance cluster
(ebmc2). int’l conf on advanced information systems engineering (caise’12), pp. 398–
413 (2012)
2linh thao ly, conrad indiono, jürgen mangler, stefanie rinderle-ma: data transform-
ation and semantic log purging for process mining. int’l conf on advanced information
systems engineering (caise’12), pp. 238–253 (2012)
3simone kriglstein, günter wallner, stefanie rinderle-ma: a visualization approach for
diﬀerence analysis of process models and instance traﬃc. int’l conf on business process
management (bpm’13), pp. 219–226 (2013)
3.22 disco (tool demo)
anne rozinat (fluxicon process laboratories, nl)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©anne rozinat
this talk presented disco, a professional tool for process mining practitioners.
3.23 dpmine/p complex experiment model markup language as
applied to prom
sergey a. shershakov (nru higher school of economics – moscow, ru)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©sergey a. shershakov
in his talk, sergey shershakov considered dpmine/p, a new language for modeling domain-
speciﬁc process mining experiments, and tool support for this language based on prom
platform. the language under development aims at the uniﬁcation of the separate phases
of an experiment into a single sequence, that is an experiment model, support of looping
constructs and other execution threads controls, provision of a clear but ﬂexible (and, what
is important, expandable) semantics. dpmine/p language is considered at the level of prom
tool as a set of plug-ins and data objects (which are the input and output data for the
plug-ins). a description of some modules and examples of their use is provided.rafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 171
3.24 a process mining-based analysis of intentional noncompliance
pnina soﬀer (university of haifa, il)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©pnina soﬀer
business process workarounds are speciﬁc forms of incompliant behavior, where employees
intentionally decide to deviate from the required procedures although they are aware of
them. detecting and understanding the workarounds performed can guide organizations in
redesigning and improving their processes and support systems. in this talk, pnina soﬀer
presents her work on building speciﬁc types of workarounds found in practice, and deﬁning
corresponding log patterns for detecting them by process mining. pnina analyzed logs of 5
real-life processes and ﬁnd correlations between the frequency of speciﬁc workaround types
and properties of the processes and of speciﬁc activities. the analysis results promote the
understanding of workaround situations and sources.
3.25 outpatient process analysis with process mining: a case study
minseok song (unist, kr)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©minseok song
in the talk of minseok song, a case study with a real life log from a hospital in korea
is explained. based on the outpatients, event log in the hospital, he derived the process
model and compared it with the standard model in the hospital. in addition, he conducted
performance analysis to make a simulation model and analyzed the process patterns according
to patient types. according to the result of comparing the event log and their standard
process model, the matching rate was as 89.01%. that is, they relatively well understood
workﬂows of outpatients and the process was well-managed by the hospital. using the
performance analysis result, he generated the simulation model. the simulation shows that
the 10% increase of patients makes the largest change in consultation waiting time. thus,
he recommended less than 10% of increase. he extracted the process models and analyzed
the process patterns according to patient types. the most frequent pattern of each patient
type was discovered. the patterns are used to build a smart guidance app in the ubiquitous
healthcare system in the hospital. as a future work, he will analyze more processes such as
call clinical pathways, payment processes, etc.
3.26 prompt: process mining for business process improvement
alessandro sperduti (university of padova, it)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©alessandro sperduti
this talk presented the prompt project and some of the results achieved by the italian
partners. speciﬁcally, i present the basic ideas underpinning: a software for importing
data from target information systems; a role mining algorithm; an approach for automatic
selection of values for discovery algorithms parameters; a family of algorithms for on-the-ﬂy
process discovery. work in progress is outlined as well.
13481172 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
3.27 secsy: security-aware synthesis of process event logs
thomas stocker (universität freiburg, de)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©thomas stocker
one diﬃculty at developing mechanisms for business process security monitoring and auditing
is the lack of representative, controllably generated test runs to serve as an evaluation basis.
secsy tries to ﬁll this gap by providing tool support for event log synthesis. the novelty
is that it considers the activity of an “attacker” able to purposefully infringe security and
compliance requirements or simply manipulate the process’ control and data ﬂow, thereby
creating deviations of the intended process model. the resulting logs can be readily replayed
on a reference monitor, or serve as input for auditing tools based upon, e.g., process mining.
3.28 prom 6.3 (tool demo)
eric verbeek (eindhoven university of technology, nl)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©eric verbeek
process mining has emerged as a way to analyze business processes based on event logs.
these events logs need to be extracted from operational systems and can subsequently be
used to discover or check the conformance of processes. prom is a widely used tool for
process mining. earlier versions of prom were distributed under the cpl license, required
a gui to run, and came with all functionality in a single bundle. as a result, it was not
possible to run a mining algorithm form, say, a command line prompt, and we had problems
using third-party libraries that came with a conﬂicting license. prom 6 overcomes these
problems, and prom 6.3 is the latest version in this line of prom releases. prom 6.3 can be
downloaded from http://www.promtools.org/prom6.
3.29 process mining in china - recent work on event quality
jianmin wang (tsinghua university beijing, cn)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©jianmin wang
business process management has been used in chinese enterprises widely in last 10 years.
investigating the accumulated event logs will enhance their competition capacities. however,
the event quality is often not good enough. in this talk, jianmin wang introduced his
recent work on event quality. 1) he studied the eﬃcient techniques for recovering missing
events. advanced indexing and pruning techniques based on petri net unfolding theories are
developed to improve the recovery eﬃciency. 2) a generic pattern based matching framework
was proposed, which is compatible with the existing structure based techniques. to improve
the matching eﬃciency, he devised several bounds of matching scores for pruning. 3) an
algorithm of mining the non-free choice structure from the dirty log with missing event was
also introduced. finally, the academic research groups in china are emulated and future
research directions of our group are presented.rafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 173
3.30 turning event logs into process movies: animating what has
really happened
massimiliano de leoni (university of padova, it)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©massimiliano de leoni
today’s information systems log vast amount of data which contains information about the
actual execution of business processes. the analysis of this data can provide a solid starting
point for business process improvement. this is the realm of process mining, an area which
has provided a repertoire of many analysis techniques. despite the impressive capabilities
of existing process mining algorithms, dealing with the abundance of data recorded by
contemporary systems and devices remains a challenge. of particular importance is the
capability to guide the meaningful interpretation of this “ocean” of data by process analysts.
to this end, insights from the ﬁeld of visual analytics can be leveraged. the talk discussed an
approach where process states are reconstructed from event logs and visualised in succession,
leading to an animated history of a process. this approach is customizable in how a process
state, partially deﬁned through a collection of activity instances, is visualized: one can select
a map and specify a projection of activity instances on this map based on their properties.
the approach is implemented as plug-in for process-mining framework prom. the talk will
also show the application to a case study with one of australia’s largest insurance companies:
suncorp.
3.31 introducing process mining at rabobank
frank van geﬀen (rabobank – utrecht, nl)
license
 creative commons by 3.0 unported license
©frank van geﬀen
our challenge is to match the customer needs of tomorrow. the speed and complexity of
today’s changes require a diﬀerent approach to process improvement. process mining, or
automated business process discovery, is a bpm technique that helps in gaining insight in
how processes are actually performed, how systems are used and how people work together.
through the explosive growth of data and signiﬁcant advances in analysis and visualization
technology it’s possible to unlock valuable process information by analyzing transaction data.
the use of automated business process discovery techniques yield new valuable insights.
process analysis done this way becomes fact based, full, for real and fast. frank van geﬀen
told about his experience with introducing this new technology at rabobank. based on his
practical experience, he stated the speciﬁc value of this technique for rabobank. besides the
successes, frank will also share the pitfalls he encountered and what measures can be taken
to circumvent these obstacles.
4 discussion sessions
the seminar comprised 12 discussion sessions. figure 2 depicts their organization and the
chairs of each sessions. the following provides a summary of these discussion sessions, as
reported by the discussion chairs.
13481174 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
figure 2 overview of discussions sessions.
4.1 discussion session 1: process mining of multi-perspective models
the motivation for this group was to discuss whether it would help to explore multiple
perspectives in developing process mining algorithms. the group started out by identifying
multiple perspectives in addition to the control ﬂow perspective, i.e.:
data
resource/role/organizational
inter-process communication
time, costs, risks, energy consumption
state of a process
performance
context
the discussion mainly centered on the data and organizational perspectives. we sum-
marize the main issues discussed.
the complexity problem
to deal with the added complexity of multiple perspectives, one could start from a control
ﬂow model and enhance it with data related conditions at choice nodes and roles associated
with tasks in the model. this may not always work because in some examples of bpmn
model discovery it leads to a “spaghetti model.” yet it was felt that each new perspective
potentially adds value. two approaches discussed are: 1) treat each perspective as a layer of
an onion, where the order of layers would be situation and need dependent; 2) analyze each
perspective separately, and integrate them. however, it was noted that a clean separation
may not always be possible.rafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 175
representation problem
while diﬀerent perspectives can be used for ﬁltering, clustering and alignment, how do we
visualize them? an appeal of the control ﬂow model lies in the ease of its visual representation
as a graph. some aspects can be added to this model by means of conditions and rules at
gateway nodes, and association of roles with tasks. however, security constraints like binding
and separation of duties would be hard to show. there is also need to avoid clutter and
give users an ability to select what perspectives they wish to see and to zoom in-out, etc.
as is done with maps. further, multidimensional information could be displayed in 2-d by
pairwise cartography.
log issues
to perform multi-perspective mining the log must include additional data beyond events and
timestamps. thus, the need for additional data in logs was discussed. it was also noted that
data can help to discover causality relationships and thus lead to inference of control ﬂow
also. the limits of our analysis capability are naturally limited by the information provided
by a user in the log. the group felt it would also be interesting to think about extending the
xes standard to include event data.
conclusions
this discussion group sees value in research on multi-perspective process mining. it sees
research challenges in the representation and complexity problems. it is felt that multiple
perspectivescanbeanalyzedseriallyorseparatelybasedonuserquestionsanddataavailability
finally, a need is perceived for user-deﬁnable interfaces that allow selection of perspectives,
zoom feature, etc. and for extending the xes standard to represent event data in a log.
4.2 discussion session 2: data quality and data preparation
the purpose of the discussion was to gain insights into practical data quality and preparation
challenges experienced by the participants. to this end, we ﬁrst collected typical data
challenges from the group and then presented our own challenges, which we had prepared.
frank discussed some challenges based on two real examples from the rabobank to make it
concrete. to summarize the data quality problems/issues regarding the data quality , we used
an existing framework2to categorize the challenges we had collected in the group and before:
it became apparent during the discussions that missing events and timestamp problems
were the most frequently issues mentioned. the discussion session discussed further data
quality issues, which for the sake of space will not be described in detail here.
turning to the data preparation , we added the data preparation phase “obtaining” before
“cleaning”, “integration”, “selection”, and “transformation” as a result of the discussion.
to position the discussed activities in the context of a process mining project, we used
an existing lifecycle model3that also illustrates the iterative nature of data preparation,
validation, data cleaning, etc. this is depicted in fig. 4.
2r. p. jagadeesh chandra bose, ronny s. mans, wil m. p. van der aalst. wanna improve process
mining results? it’s high time we consider data quality issues seriously. bpm center report
bpm-13-02, bpmcenter.org, 2013
3t. van der heijden, process mining project methodology: devoloping a general approach to apply
process mining in practice. master thesis, 2012
13481176 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
figure 3 data quality categories.
figure 4 lifecycle for data preparation.
the complete list of collected data preparation challenges is the following:
obtaining : diverse data sources; very large datasets; transportation of data; same tables
for diﬀerent processes; what’s the right process / activity scope?; lack / mismatch
between technical (data) documentation and reality; access to diﬀerent domain roles /
function for understanding.
cleaning : validation following individual cases (verifying data quality); removing duplic-
ates; correctingdate-timestamps; actioncodestranslationtorealnames(human-readable,
url to semantic action); what’s case_id pointing at? (customers / products / docu-
ments / complaints / combinations.); sampling (understanding data); server times vs.
local times.
integration : merging data sources; how to deal with large blobs full of free text?; large ﬁle
size, long waiting time; usage of diﬀerent separator <quotes> ; which merging sequence /
order of steps? (when to merge which data / ﬁrst merge then proces view or visa versa /
automation).
selection : connecting multiple case ids to follow end-to-end process; what amount of
data is required? (as much as possible, prize, anonymizing, decision criteria); does the
dataset need to be enriched?; sampling (criteria?).
transformation : formatting: activities in columns, you lose loops and assume a pre-
speciﬁed process is followed; server times vs. local times; which environment is receiving
the prepared data? (disco sets other standards than rapid miner, tableau or click view
for example); working with / without weekends and night-shifts (adjusting timestamps to
match the organizations opening and closing times); multiple case_id’s (customer_id ,
product_id ,document_id ,update_id ,session_id ,authorization_id ).rafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 177
the discussion then elicited the following questions and action points:
questions
how to teach checking and communicating data requirements for process mining?
are there tools to help with the understanding of the data properties?
what are the consequences of the diﬀerent data quality levels from the manifesto on
certain process analysis questions?
when to use sampling and according to which criteria?
could there be a tool to automatically guide through the data preparation process?
organize seminars together with the database community?
actions
share data sets online.
share best practices.
bpi challenge: compare and summarize the submissions to gain insight in the diﬀerent
approaches
4.3 discussion session 3: process discovery: playing with the
representaional bias
the goal of this discussion was to identify the main challenges the representational bias
brings into the process discovery discipline. one of the initial discussion run through the
proper notion, specially what characterizes a discovery algorithm in terms of the implicit
bias it has.
right after discussing the general notion, the group has identiﬁed two diﬀerent levels
from which the representational bias can be considered:
thelogicallevel: where aspects like the semantics of the model (imperative/declarative),
the patterns to be represented, and even the ability to transform the derived models is
an important issue.
theuserlevel: where quality metrics related to the user must be taken into account, e.g.,
truthfulness, readability, multi-perspective, are examples of this.
both of these levels are by themselves challenging, and it is agreed that very few work
has been done into guiding process discovery algorithms for satisfying them.
at thelogicallevel, there are well-known examples of patterns that diﬀerentiate discovery
algorithms: expressive power, concurrency, skip/duplicate activities, non-free-choiceness,
hierarchy, loops or cancellation are typical examples of patterns that not all algorithms
have. on the other hand, process discovery is harden by the presence of other problems
like noise, incompleteness, concept drift (it seems is less stringent in practice). in addition,
the granularity of event information has been identiﬁed as a problematic issue, but also
the selection of parameters given a particular process discovery technique. one promising
direction has been identiﬁed, which may alleviate some of the problems before: deﬁne log
features that can help into making decisions and transformations into the log for improving
the discovery.
at theuserlevel, an issue which is important is the current situation of process discovery
algorithms: do the current users know their bias? the discussion group has identiﬁed as
a challenge the user explanation of each algorithm’s bias. apart from that, other factors
like execution time available for discovery, expected truthfulness of the model, or desired
13481178 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
readability are crucial factors that the user may want to determine when using an algorithm.
again, very few techniques posses the aforementioned abilities.
general challenges have been identiﬁed, which listed below:
1.how to control the representational bias of process discovery algorithms? the conclusion
of the discussion group was that it seems an important aspect, although few techniques
oﬀer it. one example is the ability of certain algorithms, like the inductive miner or
the miners implementing the theory of regions, to focus the search of a model to certain
quality criteria established a priori.
2.meta-discovery: both at the logical and at the user level, it seems relevant to decide
generically the representation. an example now comes handy: declarative models are
known to be good in “turbulent” scenarios, while imperative models may better ﬁt
structured scenarios. one can use domain knowledge, log features or the like to decide
it. the same can apply at a more concrete level, like what particular formalism may be
better for the user, e.g., bpmn or petri nets.
3.industrial bias: the fact that industry is mostly considering standards like bpmn does
not mean that process discovery algorithms should only aim at discovering these models.
it is better to concentrate on the identiﬁcation of patterns that may then be translated to
the visual representation in terms of a particular formalism. also, the group has identiﬁed
the importance of having transformations between formalisms, even in the presence of
precision losses or similar inaccuracies.
as starting point for further actions, the group has created a dropbox folder where
related papers will be collected in order to iterate over the literature and ﬁnd synergies. as
future work, it may be possible to trigger some collaborations in diﬀerent dimensions (writing
a report, joint eﬀorts, and the like).
4.4 discussion session 4: evaluation of process mining algorithms:
benchmark data sets and conformance metrics
in this discussion session, we considered the maturity of the process mining community.
while the research on process mining is maturing, the need arises for a clear benchmarking
methodology, such that (a) researchers can objectively compare their results and performance
against other researchers results and (b) researchers can easily exchange comparison results.
the methodology should be language independent and community accepted.
during the discussion, we established that a model, when drawn by a process modeling
specialist, is always created for a particular purpose. the purpose of a model should always
be considered by process mining researchers in their evaluations, i.e. comparing process
mining techniques should only be done for those techniques that serve the same purpose. in
many papers today, comparisons are made without looking at the purpose of the models,
thus leading to false comparisons. during our discussion, we identiﬁed several purposes, such
as:
prediction, i.e. answering “what if?” questions,
happy ﬂow discovery, i.e. visualizing the main process ﬂow,
perfect representation, i.e. models that very accurately show what behavior was observed,
performance analysis, i.e. models that provide insights into the performance of an “as-is”
situation, and
deviation discovery, i.e. where models explicitly show deviations from reference models,
business rules, etc.rafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 179
depending on the purpose of a model, several aspects of the model may be more or
less important, hence when evaluating the quality of a process model against an event log,
several dimensions should be considered. during the discussion, we identiﬁed the following
dimensions for which we believe language independent metrics should be developed:
replay ﬁtness, i.e. the fraction of the observed behavior that ﬁts a model,
precision, a measure for the amount of behavior allowed by a model, but not observed,
simplicity, which quantiﬁes the understandability of the model given the behavior it
expresses,
generalization, which quantiﬁes to what extent the model generalizes from the observed
behavior, and
level of decomposition, hierarchical or otherwise, quantifying how “ﬂat” a model is.
when comparing process mining techniques, it is important to realize that optimality
can often not be reached in all dimensions, i.e. models may be pareto optimal. during
the discussion, we came to the conclusion that there is currently no clear methodology for
evaluating process mining techniques. therefore, a full methodology will be proposed in a
paper to be written by several participants of the dagstuhl seminar.
to conclude, some clear points were made that should be considered already today when
comparing process mining techniques to existing work:
compare new techniques with allexisting techniques serving the same purpose ,
compare new techniques against many, randomly generated datasets ,
compare new techniques on public, real-life datasets available in the 3tu datacenter and
alwayspublish synthetic data in the 3tu datacenter and preferably publish real life data
too.
4.5 discussion session 5: advanced topics in process discovery:
on-the-ﬂy and distributed process discovery
the goal of this discussion was to identify the main challenges posed by on-the-ﬂy and
distributed process discovery.
on-the-ﬂy process discovery requires the compliance to the typical stream processing
constraints: i) since it is impossible to store the complete stream, only a ﬁnite memory budget
is allowed; ii) backtracking over a data stream is not feasible, so discovery algorithms are
required to make only one pass over data, taking bounded time per event; iii) it is important
to quickly adapt the process model to cope with evolving processes (concept drift); iv) the
approach must deal with variable system conditions, such as ﬂuctuating stream rates. some
on-the-ﬂy discovery algorithms able to generate control-ﬂow models and declare models
have already be deﬁned. the success of these algorithms has been evaluated using traditional
metrics deﬁned for oﬀ-line process discovery. thus it was debated how to deﬁne a proper
evaluation measure for stream discovery tasks. it was agreed that the use of some of the
data from the stream to evaluate ﬁtness, precision, and other already deﬁned measures can
be considered a satisfactory solution, especially if these measures are then integrated over
time. after some discussion, the addition of the social and data perspectives was recognized
as an important ﬁrst challenge. considering on-the-ﬂy both social and data perspectives is
not obvious since the process model may change over time (concept drift). it was suggested
that, concerning the data perspective, a possible solution could be to deﬁne a stability index
over the control-ﬂow and when the control-ﬂow is stable, learn rules for choice points. when
this problem is considered from a declarative point of view, a critical issue is whether the
13481180 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
concept of “activation of a constraint” is still “valid” in a stream setting. the result of
the discussion on this issue has been that such concept seems to make sense as long as
single events (disregarding the trace they belong to) are considered, while it seems not to be
meaningful when considering an event within a single trace. diﬀerent declarative discovery
algorithms can be devised according to whether event-based or trace-based focus is adopted.
another important challenge that was discussed is how can discovery algorithms which
are not based on simple statistics, as the already proposed algorithms, be extended to cope
with the stream scenario constraints. the discussion suggested two kind of answers. a
ﬁrst suggested general approach has been to face a single constraint at time, so to evolve
versions of the algorithm that eventually will be able to cope with all of them. a more
speciﬁc approach could be to use a model update strategy that works only on the parts of
the model that are aﬀected by the current event (as already suggested by some authors in
similar scenarios); however, it is not clear that the constraint on computational time will be
satisﬁed. in addition, a potential problem of this latter approach is that concept drift, e.g. in
seasonal processes, may not aﬀect ﬁtness while seriously aﬀecting precision. a suggested way
to cope with this issue is to adopt strategies to recognize which parts of the current process
model is not used anymore and then remove them.
the discussion then focused on what should be visualized as output by these type of
discovery algorithms. it was observed that it is not suﬃcient to output only the current
model. it is more informative to display a model where not recently used parts are identiﬁed
by a “cold” color, while most recently used parts are identiﬁed by a “hot” color. this allows
for a comprehensive summary of historical behaviors. moreover, it could be nice to generate
a “movie” showing the evolution of the model in time. a grand challenge would be to mine
the model evolution to extract a summary of how the model has evolved in time.
the discussion then turned on the usefulness of on-the-ﬂy discovery algorithms in practical
applications. there was a general agreement on the fact that ﬁrst of all, companies are
more and more adopting information systems able to produce and to process streams of
data; secondly, this kind of algorithms are anytime algorithms which can be used under
user deﬁned time and storage constraints: user does not want to wait hours to discover that
she/he selected the wrong data for process discovery. thus, there is a positive side-eﬀect in
designing stream discovery algorithms, since this will allow the user to signiﬁcantly shorten
the exploration of event logs.
a ﬁnal discussed issue concerning on-the-ﬂy process discovery was whether gpus can be
used to speed-up computation for more demanding discovery algorithms. the discussion did
lead to three outcomes. first of all, it was observed that ﬁrst results on computing ﬁtness for
traces in a log are negative, mainly because it is very time consuming to transfer data from
ram to gpu global ram (gram); moreover alignment is done in a sequential fashion.
evolution of gpu architectures and a smarter way to perform alignment could improve the
situation in the near future. secondly, computation of ﬁtness could be distributed over many
cpus, while gpu computing can be used for other computations which are more suited for
gpus architecture. finally, one solution to the above problems could be to study whether
computation in discovery algorithms can be cast in a mathematical form which is amenable
to fast gpu computation, such as matricial computation.
the second main argument of discussion was the possibility to distribute computation of
process discovery (and conformance checking) algorithms over many cpus. in fact, recently
it was observed that petri nets can be decomposed (under speciﬁc mild constraints) into
small parts, so to allow distribution of computation. an interesting observation is that
such decomposition can be inherited by any log generated by the target petri net. thisrafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 181
allows to deﬁne a distributed discovery algorithm where the log is ﬁrst decomposed into
several small parts; these parts are then used to discover corresponding process models; the
discovered process models are then glued together and eventually the resulting process model
is simpliﬁed to obtain the ﬁnal process model.
an important challenge is how to partition the log so to guarantee that the “right” process
is discovered. it was observed that there are two possible ways to partition the log. a trivial
one is to partition the log horizontally, i.e. a diﬀerent subset of traces is assigned to each
cpu core. an alternative way is to split it vertically, i.e. split each trace in several pieces
and distribute them among the cpus cores.
it is not clear, however, how to do the vertical partitioning in an optimal way, i.e. by
reducing the computational eﬀort while obtaining the correct model. a ﬁnal raised question
was whether conformance checking can take advantage by distributed computation. the
answer was aﬃrmative, trivially, each cpu core has a copy of the model and checks one
trace; results are ﬁnally aggregated.
in summary, on-the-ﬂy and distributed process discovery constitute very useful techniques
which pose several computational challenges. promising research lines to successfully face
these computational challenges, however, emerged from the discussion, and there is concrete
hope that very soon new and more eﬃcient and eﬀective process discovery algorithms will be
devised.
4.6 discussion session 6: process mining and big data
the idea of this session was to discuss the relation between (a) big data, (b) big data
technologies, and (c) process mining. we now live in a time where the amount of data created
daily goes easily beyond the processing capabilities of nowadays systems. nevertheless the
strategic importance of the knowledge hidden in such data, for eﬀective decision making
is paramount. the ability of organizations, governments but also individuals to collect
information in a plethora of diﬀerent systems/formats has largely overwhelmed the ability to
extract useful knowledge from it4; not to cite the attempt to integrate such knowledge with
relevant information available outside organizational boundaries. the rapidly growing data
sets with event data provide opportunities and also challenges.
the session started by introducing to the audience the term big data as “the term for a
collection of data sets so large and complex that it becomes diﬃcult to process using on-hand
database management tools or traditional data processing applications. the challenges
include capture, curation, storage, search, sharing, transfer, analysis, and visualization.”
(wikipedia). the group discussed about the need for a big data approach in process mining
and the availability and existence of so called big data event logs. a part of the group was
arguing on one hand that there is not really a urgent need for applying big data techniques
to process mining since the research community is still focusing on solving other issues
and that anyway big data sets are not easily accessible; on the other hand the fact that
enterprises, governmental organizations and the likes are storing increasing amount of data
and the process mining approaches and algorithms need to be adapted to this situation in
order to be eﬀective in the real world.
4gross, b. m. (1964). the managing of organizations: the administrative struggle. new york: free press
of glencoe.
13481182 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
the group identiﬁed the possibility for the research community to access large event logs
from no proﬁt organizations, governmental institutions, supply chain processes where data
need to be shared. the ﬁrst action point of the discussion was set to identify big data logs
and made them publicly available for the process mining research community. then the
discussion moved on the three vs (volume, velocity, and variety) which deﬁne the dimension
of bigdata set in relation to process mining. we focused on measuring the event logs in
relation to the three vs: the group identiﬁed that big volume in logs can mean a big number
of process execution traces and/or big number of events per trace and/or big number of
attributes per process/event. big velocity means in process mining that the logs needs to
processed before a given time, the rate between the incoming logs and the consumed ones
need to be constant and this is valid also for the process mining algorithms. finally we
discussed about what variety means in process logs; one obvious observation was on the fact
that logs can have multiple formats and the systems should be able to deal with this, but
a less obvious comment was on the fact that logs can have multiple points of view and by
changing the identiﬁer of the process case the process can be seen from a completely new
perspective. also the group moved on discussing if going full data makes sense: the trend
is nowadays is a “throw in all” approach but this needs to be carefully done by analyzing
costs versus beneﬁts of this trend. moreover it was pointed out that with big data in the
picture it becomes paramount to help the user to “ﬁnd the needle in the haystack” and so
local or partial mining/visualization techniques may become necessary in the future. then,
after a short introduction to the main big data technologies the discussion focused on what
technologies can be relevant to process mining: depending on the problem to solve map
reduce can be used or not but it needs to be carefully planned because forcing a map reduce
approach can easily degrade performances.
map reduce has been used in some cases for preprocessing the logs for correlation however
the map reduce framework imposes some relevant constraints on the way the conformance
checking or process discovery algorithm access the log data. the particular data partitioning
step required for distributed process mining is the main reason why map reduce cannot
be easily used for the generic approach in distributed process discovery and conformance
checking. the group identiﬁed the fact that map reduce can be used for some simple process
mining algorithm such as the alpha algorithm5, other more complex algorithm, especially
the ones sharing global states cannot be easily implemented in map reduce and therefore
a shared memory approach (memcached, grid computing, gpus) is advisable. problems
like concept drift on streams of events can be solved using a distributed stream processing
approach (such as storm). the discussion then moved on presenting a set of research works
on distributed mining6that can be considered the actual state of the art. some approaches7
use distributed computing to speed up process mining algorithms such as the genetic process
mining, however the log is replicated across the nodes and therefore this approach is not
possible is the logs cannot be stored entirely in one machine. therefore the group focused on
the fact that the partitioning of the logs is of extreme importance for eﬀective distributed
process mining. moreover horizontal partitioning technique provides some additional beneﬁts
5a paper on this aspect titled “big data meets process mining. implementation of alpha algorithm in
map reduce” will be published at ee track acm-sac 2014)
6w. m. p. van der aalst. decomposing petri nets for process mining: a generic approach. distributed
and parallel databases 31(4):471-507, 2013.
7c. bratosin, n. sidorova, and w. m. p. van der aalst. distributed genetic process mining. ieee
world congress on computational intelligence, pp. 1951–1958. ieee, 2010)rafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 183
like data compression. also process cubes8can beneﬁt from a distributed approach in order
to speed up the slicing, dicing, drilling down and rolling up of process traces and distribute
the mining of separate set of process traces. finally the discussion ended by introducing the
concept of open data sets representing all sort of data (weather, biological, traﬃc records,
...) which nowadays are publicly available; some data mining tools such as rapid miner
started providing pug ins in order to use this type of data in the mining process, but this
sort of data have never been used for process mining therefore it may be interesting to see if
this data can provide beneﬁts especially in the analytical aspect.
4.7 discussion session 7: process mining in health-care
health care is considered an interesting and promising domain for process mining application,
due to its challenging processes, where signiﬁcant impact can be made. the discussion took
as a starting point two diﬀerent views of a medical process:
clinical view : actions done for aﬀecting the current physical state of patients. the
emphasis of this view is on curing patients, improving their life expectancy and quality,
and being able to predict outcomes of treatment. treatment processes should comply
with clinical guidelines.
logistic / administrative view: execution of the medical process using resources over
time, spending and gaining money. this view emphasizes kpi and resource optimization,
while meeting standards and constraints. it also addresses scheduling, costing, billing,
and mitigating legal risks.
process mining research has so far mainly addressed the logistic view. the frequently
asked questions of process mining in health care9have relevance for both views, but their
essence is at the logistic view. for the clinical view, data as well as control ﬂow and data
perspectives should be emphasized.
current process mining approaches are capable of meeting most of the needs of the logistic
view. hence, this view poses an opportunity for the process mining community to make a
signiﬁcant impact and show good results.
the clinical view has so far received less attention. the challenges it raises are many fold.
first, it requires addressing the data perspective, so in addition to considering the actions,
their outcomes should also be addressed (e.g., the result of the x-ray). second, understanding
the data requires domain knowledge, hence collaboration with physicians is needed. third,
compliance should be assessed with respect to medical knowledge (clinical guidelines), whose
representation requires expressiveness beyond that of business process models (e.g., temporal
constraints). finally, mining results need to be visualized in a way which captures all the
relevant aspects and is meaningful to domain experts. of current output forms, the output
of declarative decision mining can be suitable, especially if transformed to natural language
representation.
nevertheless, important results can emerge from mining the clinical view. speciﬁcally,
these results can provide improved decision support for physicians. furthermore, conformance
8w. m. p. van der aalst. process cubes: slicing, dicing, rolling up and drilling down event data for
process mining. volume 159 of lecture notes in business information processing, pp. 1–22, springer
2013.
9r. s. mans et al. “process mining in healthcare: data challenges when answering frequently posed
questions.” process support and knowledge representation in health care. vol. 7738 of lecture notes
in computer science, pp. 140–153. springer berlin heidelberg, 2013.
13481184 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
checking is of importance since diﬀerent decisions might be taken by diﬀerent physicians
in similar situations. using current technology requires much data preparation, including
preprocessing and cleaning (e.g., combining activities of the same type), dynamic labeling,
and tagging events during execution.
case study on a treatment of “urinary tract infection”. considering a given process
model, two groups (for the clinical and the logistic view) discussed the questions to be
addressed and the desired results of mining.
logistic view: the analysis process should include three diﬀerent phases: (1) initial inform-
ation gathering from experts: the problem, a normative process model, kpis. (2) from
detailed questions, detailed analysis can be performed, and (3) the results can lead to further
exploration. the speciﬁc questions would depend on the purpose of analysis and on the
stakeholder it should serve (e.g., hospitals seek to maximize throughput and minimize costs).
benchmark data and relevant standards will be needed. example questions may include: (1)
what is the cost of every test, which tests and what is their order. analysis can contribute to
ﬁnal decision (skip tests, reordering); (2) how long for each step; (3) are there reworks (tests
that are repeated); (4) are things that are not recorded not necessarily happening; (5) are
actions done in batches; (6) what is the average time between tests / scheduling constraints /
how long are patients waiting; (7) are there diﬀerences in treatment path among physicians.
clinical view: this group devoted less attention to the details of the speciﬁc case study, and
discussed clinical view mining requirements in general. tooling – representation should be
dynamic and interactive, capable of handling spaghetti-like processes, and allow switching
between views (e.g., showing simple ﬂowchart and projecting other data). new views might
also be needed. the role of context is crucial. context includes patient data attributes
(e.g., age), treatment history, and status of other running instances. to support this,
mining can relate to feature selection for extracting context. then all mining can relate
to context: treatment pathways, treatment outcomes (with respect to context-dependent
goals), forecasting and operational support (e.g., possible consequences of treatment options).
decision support should provide recommendations by a case-based system.
4.8 discussion session 8: security and privacy issues in large process
data sets
this session considered security and privacy issues from two perspectives. firstly, how
process mining techniques may help to secure systems and, secondly, the security and privacy
issues that arise as a consequence of process mining.
enterprise system security can be characterized in terms of the security controlsthat are
required to mitigate the threatsto the objectives of its business processes . threats can range
from failures in business processes to more infrastructure-level vulnerabilities such as those
cataloged by vulnerability databases. process mining can help with threat identiﬁcation by
generating reference models of normal behavior against which anomalous behavior in logs
can be detected and explained (conformance checking).
the application of process mining to the conﬁguration and selection of security controls
was discussed. organizational mining can help in the discovery of rbac conﬁgurations and
it was suggested that process discovery could help in the discovery of behaviors used for the
conﬁguration of task-based security policies. while a discovered process can be used for
subsequent conformance-checking, an alternative viewpoint is whether it is possible to alsorafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 185
use this process to generate/recommend security controls that enforce conformant behavior.
for example, using a discovered document workﬂow to help deploy checksum-based controls
in a document handling system. a related question is how process mining could be used
to explore whether the current security controls are resilient to changes in the process, and
vice-versa.
audit procedures test the eﬃcacy of security controls and it was suggested that process
mining could provide a basis for a more complete check on control eﬃcacy. security controls
and their audit procedures are not necessarily integrated into business processes. for example,
a procedure that regularly searches the ﬁle system for stray plain-text credit card numbers
operates independently of credit-card based transaction processes. a research challenge is
how security controls, along with their audit procedures, can be correlated with discovered
business processes in order to provide more threat-aware conformance checking.
notwithstanding the conventional integrity, availability, authenticity, non-repudiation
and conﬁdentiality challenges surrounding process and log data, process mining introduces
particular assurance issues. log data can come from diﬀerent sources with varying degrees
of assurance and trustworthiness. one question is how these relationships might be securely
managed and how they might be reﬂected, not just in the original log-data, but also surfaced
into any discovered process. would such a scheme require a single security authority with
jurisdiction over all log data and sources, or can a more decentralized approach be taken?
the latter may be useful if organizations share log data. for example, organizations merging
or aligning their interdependent processes in a supply-chain. for these federated logs, what
are their security and privacy requirements and how might they be implemented?
diﬀerent users may have diﬀerent views on diﬀerent process logs and process mining
should preserve these view restrictions. a challenge is the extent to which process mining can
be carried out on views alone rather than on the full log-data. an advantage of the former is
that any (security) failure in mining does not expose data outside the view, while the latter
provides more precision but requires assurance in the process mining software. a further
challenge is how log data can be reliably de-identiﬁed/anonymized. diﬀerential-privacy based
techniques may be useful in implementing privacy aware views: a discovered process should
not reveal data previously de-identiﬁed in the log.
lastly, a recent semantic study on the cost of data breaches identiﬁed human factors
and business process failures as a signiﬁcant contributory factor. given that process mining
helps provide deeper understanding and control of business processes it would be worthwhile
investigating its application to identifying process weaknesses that may lead to data breach.
4.9 discussion session 9: conformance checking for security,
compliance and auditing
a large part of the discussion was concerned with coming to an agreement of the terminology.
the discussion was very active but, unfortunately, it has been impossible to agree on the
terminology. in particular, it was clear to identify two diﬀerent schools of thought:
a ﬁrst school diﬀerentiated between a-priori and a-posteriori veriﬁcation. compliance
checking is concerned with verify the to-be model against norms, regulations, security
constraints. therefore, compliancecheckingisstrictlyrelatedtoanalysisandveriﬁcationof
an executable model, which should adhere to constraints imposed by laws and regulations.
in many settings, it is not strictly enforced that the actual execution follows this model.
here, conformance checking comes to play. conformance checking is about verifying
13481186 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
whether the actual executions, as recorded in the event log, follow the same constraints.
in this case, there is not one single model but, rather, multiple models that are built
ad-hoc for the sole purpose of rules’ checking.
a second school sees conformance checking as a mean to check compliance. conformance
checking takes a regulatory model and an event log and highlights the non-conformances.
in this sense, there is some common point with the view at point 1. the serious diﬀerence
is with respect compliance checking, which is still about verifying the behavior observed
in the event log. compliance checking is concerned with a number of norms, regulations
that are converted in a number of regulatory models. using the conformance-checking
means, each of the regulatory models is veriﬁed against the event log at disposal. in this
second school, auditing is an umbrella under which compliance checking is placed, along
with “static” conformance veriﬁcation. the latter refers to an executable model that is
wanted to check the adherence with laws and regulations.
during the discussion, many issues raised up about the languages. in the last decade,
several languages have been standardized. the discussion’s participants agreed on the fact
that there are several standards but not one largely-recognized standard.
some languages are characterized by a precise syntax and semantics but a bit complex
to use for average process analysts. some are more user-friendly but at the cost of less
accuracy in the semantics. this raised another important point: the usability of the languages.
the language complexity can be problematic if process analysts do not have a suﬃcient
background in mathematics. therefore, the syntax should be kept simple and intuitive
for moderately-skilled process analysts but, at the same time, should have a precise and
well-deﬁned semantics to not lead to multiple interpretations. furthermore, decidability and
complexity of the algorithms that are used for conformance/compliance checking put a bound
on the expressiveness of the languages used to deﬁne the conformance/compliance rules.
once a language and compliance/conformance algorithms are chosen, it is possible to
check for compliance and conformance. of course, a pure yes/no answer is not enough,
i.e. the executions of single process instances are compliant/conformant with rules and
regulations. the discussion participants acknowledge the important of pinpointing deviations
and their root-causes. moreover, in many settings, deviations do not occur in isolation: a
deviation may cause a cascading eﬀect, which can lead to further deviations. hence, it is
important to relate to each other when a relation may exist.
a few other important thoughts were discussed during the session. firstly, in continuous
auditing, it is important to be equipped with decision support that guides participants to not
violate compliance constraints at run time. using event logs, machine-learning techniques
can be used to discover the common patterns that lead to problems and, hence, the decision
support system can suggest execution paths that avoid them. problems of applying runtime
reasoning, e.g. supervisory control theory, are rarely applicable in this context as the
problem is inherently hard and, often, become undecidable. secondly, in many settings,
primarily in security, the conformance/compliance of the execution of process instances
cannot be checked in isolations. the compliance of an instance may depend on other instances
of the same process or, even, on instances of diﬀerent processes. this also highlights the
importance of contextual information, which should be incorporated into the analysis.
as a conclusion, every discussion participant agreed on the fact that checking compli-
ance/conformance is an important topic in the ﬁeld of business process management and
auditing. the main issue seems that, unfortunately, there is not a large consensus on what
checking compliance/conformance actually means. an eﬀort should be made in order to
make sure that there exists no diﬀerent wording for the same concepts. the discussion wasrafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 187
very animated and live. this certiﬁes that checking compliance/conformance is certainly a
topic that will attract much attention in the future. as a matter of fact, many of the existing
techniques are still in a development stage and there is a lot of room for future improvements.
4.10 discussion session 10: how to sell process mining?
goal:since everything in selling is about understanding the customer, the purpose of the
discussion was to ﬁrst gain a more nuanced view about the diﬀerent types of possible target
customers for process mining.
approach: we collected a broad range of target customers from the group and then discussed
three proﬁles in more detail. afterwards, the results were put together by frank van geﬀen
and anne rozinat.
results: an operational manager of a business process is confronted with diﬀerent (sometimes
conﬂicting) goals, as depicted in fig. 5.
figure 5 conﬂicting goals.
we used the value chain-model of porter to categorize the various business functions we
had collected and added the other categories outside of the organization. the value-chain
model is depicted in fig. 6.
figure 6 porter’s value-chain model.
the following target customers for process mining were mentioned in these categories:
1.operational manager, sales department, customer satisfaction representative, process
managers, requirements engineer, operational people, process manager / department
head, knowledge worker, software product development, supply management
13481188 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
2.business consultants, cio, quality and process improvement department, it managers,
process management department, business analyst, development and analyst people,
knowledge worker
3.higher managers, business controllers, ceo
4.financial auditors, operational auditors, it auditors, crisis and fraud people
5.european commission
6.other scientists
7.consultancy ﬁrms
8.end user
9.analyst ﬁrms,such as gartner and forrester.
we used the following three proﬁles to paint an as detailed picture of the respective
customer as possible:
a business analyst at a hospital
an end user (customer) of a service organization like the rabobank
an auditor at a manufacturing company like boeing
for each of these proﬁles we then tried to answer these questions: “how do they spend
their day?”, “which processes are in their sphere?” “what are their challenges?”, and “how
can process mining help?”
4.11 discussion session 11: what is the ideal tool for an expert user?
the idea of this session was to discuss the requirements and ideas for realizing process mining
tools aiming at experts. the discussion focusses on the following three goals: identiﬁcation of
expert user types, identiﬁcation of functional and non-functional requirements and suggestions
how the academic community could support the development of expert tools.
since “expert user” is a rather vague and general term, the discussion started with
the identiﬁcation of diﬀerent expert user types. two dimensions were proposed to identify
diﬀerent experts, i.e. the problem and user dimension. the problem dimension divides
process mining problems along a range from well structured, standardized and repeating
problems to unique, ill-structured and more generic problems. as for the user dimension,
a distinction should be made between developers of process mining algorithms and actual
users of process mining algorithms. based on these two dimensions, three expert users could
be identiﬁed.
thealgorithm developer creates new process mining algorithms for generic process
mining problems. typically, this type of expert user can be found in academia. the data
scientist can be found in a business environment and solves ill-structured process-related
business questions by means of data and the use of existing process mining algorithms. the
tool integrator is also a business user, but in contrast to the data scientist, deals with
structured and reoccurring process mining problems. they typically develop tool chains
of process algorithm tools, business intelligence tools and enterprise systems to generate
management dashboards.
next, the discussion continued with the identiﬁcation of non-functional requirements,
which are the tool-usage speciﬁc properties. the algorithm developer requires a tool
that allows reuse of existing algorithms, the ability to modify existing algorithms, proper
documentation with instructions on how to develop with the expert tool, a system whichrafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 189
encourages or even enforces proper documentation of newly developed algorithms and a
comprehensive overview of all available algorithms.
thedata scientist requires a tool that provides scripting functionality and an easy
integration with third party applications. the tool should allow the expert user to easily
import and export data from and to a wide range of formats and should provide a ﬂexible
environment to manipulate data. finally, the tool should oﬀer algorithms that are robust
and fast, well documented from a user’s perspective and which can be tuned by means of
parameters.
the tool integrator requires a tool that provides solid interconnectivity opportunities
with various enterprise systems. if the tool aims to generate the dashboard directly, it should
provide a ﬂexible and customizable user interface. furthermore, it would be a great asset if
the tool already provided and supported predeﬁned workﬂows for standard process mining
problems.
next, the discussion focused on the functional requirements which refers to currently
unavailable algorithms which will become increasingly important in the near future. the
discussiongroupidentiﬁedtheneedforprocessminingalgorithmswhichallowsfor: distributed
process mining, data stream process mining, predictive process mining, multi-perspective
process mining, direct comparison of processes at the process model level, process simulation,
interactive visualization.
finally, the meeting agreed on the importance that advances in process mining research
gets integrated in expert tools and the need for the scientiﬁc community to contribute to
the development of expert user tools. however, the concern was raised that currently there
are little to no incentives for academia to actively contribute to the development of expert
tools. for example, the current log loader of prom has problems with loading big data,
which hinders the further development of process mining algorithms for big data. while
the community would clearly beneﬁt from the development of a new log loader, it is in no
individual’s academic interest to spend a lot of time on this. to solve this catch-22, it was
suggested that the research community agrees to assign budget in future (european) research
projects to the development of much required, but academically non-interesting features and
components of tools for algorithm developers.
4.12 discussion session 12: what is the ideal tool for a casual
business user?
the idea of this session was to discuss the requirements and key success factors of a process
mining tool tailored to business users. to this end, the following topics were discussed:
what are the essential functionalities of a process mining tool for the casual business
user?
what is the functionality in existing tools that is most useful?
what is missing?
should tools provide operational support (on-the-ﬂy discovery, prediction, checking,
recommendations)?
how to visualize results?
in essence, the discussion could be capture as follows: vendors sell featureswhile customers
see thebeneﬁts. given this line of discussion, table 1 depicts the relationship – worked
out during the discussion – between diﬀerent types of uses and the corresponding beneﬁts.
table 2 establishes the relationship between the beneﬁts and the expected functionality.
13481190 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
table 1relationship between type of user and expected beneﬁts.
table 2relationship between beneﬁt and expected functionality.
rafael accorsi, ernesto damiani, and wil van der aalst 191
the discussion session ended up the following insights: an ideal tool...
...gets source data easily and with high quality. if the data does not come then there is
no continuous beneﬁts.
...actively supports the user and shows only relevant options and functions.
...supports interactive navigation during discovery phase.
...is conﬁgured by the consultant and used by the business user.
...has certain set of ﬂexibility for business end users. they do not want to call always
consultant to make changes.
currently the users are typically the early adopters who are willing to use a complex tool.
typical business managers do not have time to play with the tool.
13481192 13481 – unleashing operational process mining
participants
rafael accorsi
universität freiburg, de
antonio caforio
university of salento, it
josep carmona
upc – barcelona, es
paolo ceravolo
university of milan, it
jan claes
ghent university, be
jonathan cook
new mexico state university, us
ernesto damiani
università degli studi di milano –
crema, it
massimiliano de leoni
university of padova, it & tu
eindhoven, nl
benoit depaire
hasselt univ. – diepenbeek, be
simon n. foley
university college cork, ie
luciano garcia-banuelos
university of tartu, ee
christian günther
fluxicon process lab., nl
anna a. kalenkova
nru higher school of
economics – moscow, ru
akhil kumar
pennsylvania state univ., usgeetika t. lakshmanan
ibm tj watson res. center –
cambridge, us
teemu lehto
qpr software – helsinki, fi
marcello leida
khalifa univ. – abu dhabi, ae
maria leitner
universität wien, at
fabrizio maria maggi
university of tartu, ee
ronny s. mans
tu eindhoven, nl
alexey a. mitsyuk
nru higher school of
economics – moscow, ru
jorge munoz-gama
upc – barcelona, es
zbigniew paszkiewicz
poznan univ. of economics, pl
alessandro provetti
università di messina, it
hajo a. reijers
tu eindhoven, nl
joel tiago ribeiro
upc – barcelona, es
roland rieke
fraunhofer sit – darmstadt, de
stefanie rinderle-ma
universität wien, at
anne rozinat
fluxicon process lab., nlricardo seguel
excellentia bpm, cl
marcos sepulveda fernandez
pontiﬁcia universidad catolica
de chile, cl
sergey a. shershakov
nru higher school of
economics – moscow, ru
pnina soﬀer
university of haifa, il
minseok song
unist, kr
alessandro sperduti
university of padova, it
thomas stocker
universität freiburg, de
wil van der aalst
tu eindhoven, nl
boudewijn van dongen
tu eindhoven, nl
frank van geﬀen
rabobank – utrecht, nl
eric verbeek
tu eindhoven, nl
thomas vogelgesang
universität oldenburg, de
jianmin wang
tsinghua university beijing, cn
barbara weber
universität innsbruck, at
ton weijters
tu eindhoven, nl
