how people really (like to) work
comparative process mining to unravel human behavior
wil m.p. van der aalst
eindhoven university of technology, p.o. box 513, 5600 mb, eindhoven,
the netherlands. w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tue.nl
abstract. software forms an integral part of the most complex artifacts
built by humans. communication, production, distribution, healthcare,
transportation, banking, education, entertainment, government, and trade
all increasingly rely on systems driven by software. such systems may be
used in ways not anticipated at design time as the context in which they
operate is constantly changing and humans may interact with them an
unpredictable manner. however, at the same time, we are able to collect
unprecedented collections of event data describing what people and or-
ganizations are actually doing. recent developments in process mining
make it possible to analyze such event data, thereby focusing on behavior
rather than correlations and simplistic performance indicators. for ex-
ample, event logs can be used to automatically learn end-to-end process
models. next to the automated discovery of the real underlying process,
there are process mining techniques to analyze bottlenecks, to uncover
hidden ineciencies, to check compliance, to explain deviations, to pre-
dict performance, and to guide users towards \better" processes. pro-
cess mining reveals how people really work and often reveals what they
would really like to do. event-based analysis may reveal workarounds and
remarkable dierences between people and organizations. this keynote
paper highlights current research on comparative process mining . one
can compare event data with normative process models and see where
people deviate. some of these deviations may be positive and one can
learn from them. other deviations may reveal ineciencies, design aws,
or even fraudulent behavior. one can also use process cubes to compare
dierent systems or groups of people. through slicing, dicing, rolling-
up, and drilling-down we can view event data from dierent angles and
produce process mining results that can be compared.
1 events are everywhere!
the term \big data" is often used to refer to the incredible growth of data in
recent years. however, the ultimate goal is not to collect more data, but to turn
data into real value. this means that data should be used to improve existing
products, processes and services, or enable new ones. this explains the need for
more data scientists [3]. a data scientist should be able to answer questions of
the kind: what happened? ,why did it happen? ,what will happen? , and what is
the best that can happen? [3]. these questions all refer to the behavior of people,organizations, and systems. hence, we consider event data to be most important
source of information.
1.1 internet of events
events may take place inside a machine (e.g., an x-ray machine or baggage
handling system), inside an enterprise information system (e.g., a order placed by
a customer), inside a hospital (e.g., the analysis of a blood sample), inside a social
network (e.g., exchanging e-mails or twitter messages), inside a transportation
system (e.g., checking in, buying a ticket, or passing through a toll booth), etc.
in all of the above examples, software is instrumented to record events. these
events tell us how people and organizations behave and use the systems at their
disposal.
in [3], we coined the term the internet of events (ioe) to refer to all event
data available. the ioe is composed of:
{the internet of content (ioc): all information created by humans to increase
knowledge on particular subjects. the ioc includes traditional web pages,
articles, encyclopedia like wikipedia, youtube, e-books, newsfeeds, etc.
{the internet of people (iop): all data related to social interaction. the iop
includes e-mail, facebook, twitter, forums, linkedin, etc.
{the internet of things (iot): all physical objects connected to the network.
the iot includes all things that have a unique id and a presence in an
internet-like structure. things may have an internet connection or tagged
using radio-frequency identication (rfid), near field communication
(nfc), etc.
{the internet of locations (iol): refers to all data that have a spatial dimen-
sion. with the uptake of mobile devices (e.g., smartphones) more and more
events have geospatial attributes.
the above sources of event data not only reect the abundance of event data,
they also illustrate our reliance on complex software artifacts. software forms an
integral part of the most complex artifacts built by humans. software systems
may comprise hundreds of millions of program statements, written by thousands
of dierent programmers, spanning several decades. their complexity surpasses
the comprehensive abilities of any single, individual human being. moreover,
software must run in an ever changing context composed of dierent software
components, dierent hardware congurations, may be applied in ways not an-
ticipated at design time. classical modeling approaches have failed to cope with
this complexity. this makes it essential to learn from systems \in vivo". we
can only learn how people use systems by observing them both in their natural
habitat. the event data that are omnipresent make this possible.
1.2 event logs
process mining provides a powerful way to analyze operational processes based
on event data. unlike classical purely model-based approaches, process miningevent dataprocess cube
event logs 
(per cell)1
2
3
discovered models (per cell)
normative models54
67fig. 1. overview of comparative process mining using process cubes: ¶store events
in the process cube, ·materialize the events in a cell as an event log that can be
analyzed, ¸automatically discover models per cell (e.g., a bpmn or uml model), ¹
check conformance by replaying event data on normative (process) models, ºcompare
discovered models and normative models, »compare discovered models corresponding
to dierent cells, and ¼compare dierent behaviors by replaying event data of one cell
on another cell's model.
is driven by \raw" observed behavior instead of assumptions or aggregate data.
unlike classical data-driven approaches, it is truly process-oriented and relates
events to high-level end-to-end process models [1].
event logs serve as the starting point for process mining. an event log can be
viewed as a multiset of traces [1]. each trace describes the life-cycle of a particular
case (i.e., a process instance ) in terms of the activities executed. often event
logs store additional information about events, e.g., the resource (i.e., person or
device) executing or initiating the activity, the timestamp of the event, or data
elements recorded with the event.
2 comparative process mining
process mining can be used to analyze event data. the spectrum of available
techniques is broad and includes techniques to automatically learn end-to-endprocess models, to check conformance, to analyze bottlenecks, to predict perfor-
mance, etc. for an overview of available techniques see [1] or processmining.
org. here we would like to focus on comparative process mining , i.e., techniques
that compare behavior either in the form of models or in the form of event logs
[2, 5].
as figure 1 shows, it all starts with event data. these event data are stored
in a so-called process cube [2] with dimensions based on the event's attributes
(see¶in fig. 1). note that in a process cube, there is no xed assignment
from events to cases (process instances). the same event may belong to dif-
ferent cells (e.g., people can work in two departments), dierent cases (e.g., a
delivery may refer to multiple orders), and dierent processes (e.g., the sales
and distribution processes may share common events). the dimensions may re-
fer to groups of customers (gold versus silver customers), periods (2013 versus
2014), locations (eindhoven versus berlin), departments (sales versus procure-
ment), performance (delayed or not), etc. these dimensions can be used to slice,
dice,roll-up , and drill-down event data [2]. events can be assigned to cases and
standard attributes such as activity ,resource , and timestamp can be chosen. sub-
sequently, cells can be materialized into concrete event logs (see ·in fig. 1).
per cell dierent models can be discovered using dozens of dierent process min-
ing techniques (see ¸in fig. 1). for example, one can automatically discover
petri nets or bpmn models from such event logs. using conformance checking
techniques one can also compare the event logs to normative process models
(see¹in fig. 1). these techniques quantify the conformance level and diagnose
dierences, e.g., highlighting activities that are skipped frequently [4]. it is also
possible to compare discovered models with normative models (see ºin fig. 1).
using the dimensions in the process cube one can also quickly compare dierent
groups of cases, periods, locations, etc. for example, one can compare the mod-
els constructed for an array of cells (see »in fig. 1). what are the dierences
between the cases that got delayed and the cases that were able to meet the
deadline? why did the bottleneck shift from the back-oce to the front-oce in
spring 2014? such questions can be answered using comparative process mining.
often we also compare a discovered process model for one cell with the event
log of another cell (see ¼in fig. 1). through conformance checking we can then
analyze the dierences at a very detailed level. for example, by replaying the
event log of 2014 on the model constructed for 2013, we may see remarkable
dierences and immediately inspect the underlying event data.
3 learning from positive deviants
as figure 1 indicates, conformance checking can be done with respect to a
normative model or the model constructed for another cell. the term \normative
model" suggests that deviations are bad. however, there are many examples of
positive deviants , i.e., cases that are non-conforming but also better performing
(successful exceptions). the term \positive deviance" refers to approaches used
to identify people (but also organizational entities and process variants) whoseuncommon but successful behaviors or strategies enable them to nd better
solutions to a problem than their peers [6]. positive deviance has been been
applied in healthcare, education, agriculture, public administration, production,
and services. the concept is simple: look for outliers who succeed against all odds
rather than sicking to a normative process model . comparative process mining
{as explained using fig. 1{ is a powerful tool to distinguish between positive
deviants, mainstream behavior, and negative deviants.
process discovery and conformance checking techniques have matured over
the last decade and are well-supported by the process mining framework prom
(processmining.org ). however, better support for process cubes and an im-
proved symbiosis between data and process mining are needed to provide a
comprehensive toolbox for positive deviance. this way we can truly exploit the
torrents of event data surrounding us.
references
[1] w.m.p. van der aalst. process mining: discovery, conformance and enhancement
of business processes . springer-verlag, berlin, 2011.
[2] w.m.p. van der aalst. process cubes: slicing, dicing, rolling up and drilling
down event data for process mining. in m. song, m. wynn, and j. liu, editors,
asia pacic conference on business process management (ap-bpm 2013) , vol-
ume 159 of lecture notes in business information processing , pages 1{22. springer-
verlag, berlin, 2013.
[3] w.m.p. van der aalst. data scientist: the engineer of the future. in k. mertins,
f. benaben, r. poler, and j. bourrieres, editors, proceedings of the i-esa confer-
ence, volume 7 of enterprise interoperability , pages 13{28. springer-verlag, berlin,
2014.
[4] w.m.p. van der aalst, a. adriansyah, and b. van dongen. replaying history
on process models for conformance checking and performance analysis. wires
data mining and knowledge discovery , 2(2):182{192, 2012.
[5] w.m.p. van der aalst, s. guo, and p. gorissen. comparative process mining
in education: an approach based on process cubes. in j.j. lesage, j.m. faure,
j. cury, and b. lennartson, editors, 12th ifac international workshop on discrete
event systems (wodes 2014) , ifac series, pages pl1.1{pl1.9. ieee computer
society, 2014.
[6] r. pascale, j. sternin, and m. sternin. the power of positive deviance: how un-
likely innovators solve the world's toughest problems . harvard business review
press, 2010.