no knowledge without processes
process mining as a tool to find out what people and organizations really do
wil m.p. van der aalst
eindhoven university of technology, p .o. box 513, 5600 mb, eindhoven, the netherlands
w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tue.nl
keywords: process mining, process discovery, conformance checking, data mining, business intelligence
abstract: in recent years, process mining emerged as a new and exciting collection of analysis approaches. process
mining combines process models and event data in various novel ways. as a result, one can ﬁnd out what
people and organizations really do. for example, process models can be automatically discovered from event
data. compliance can be checked by confronting models with event data. bottlenecks can be uncovered by
replaying timed events on discovered or normative models. hence, process mining can be used to identify
and understand bottlenecks, inefﬁciencies, deviations, and risks. despite the many successful applications of
process mining, few people are aware of the recent advances in process mining. one of the main reasons is
that process mining is not part of existing (a) data mining, (b) machine learning, (c) business intelligence,
(d) process modeling, and (e) simulation approaches and tools. for example, conventional “data miners”
use a very broad deﬁnition of data mining, but at the same time focus on a limited set of classical problems
unrelated to process models (e.g., decision tree learning, regression, pattern mining, and clustering). none of
the classical data mining tools supports process mining techniques such as process discovery, conformance
checking, and bottleneck analysis. this keynote paper brieﬂy summarizes the differences between process
mining and more established analysis and modeling approaches. moreover, the paper emphasis the need to
extract process-related knowledge.
1 introduction
the current attention for big data anddata science
is driven by the increasing volume and value of data.
here we focus on event data, i.e., information on
things that happen in organizations, machines, sys-
tems, and people’s lives. in (aalst, 2014b) the term
internet of events (ioe) was coined. the ioe is com-
posed of:
theinternet of content (ioc): all information cre-
ated by humans to increase knowledge on par-
ticular subjects. the ioc includes traditional
web pages, articles, encyclopedia like wikipedia,
youtube, e-books, newsfeeds, etc.
the internet of people (iop): all data related to
social interaction. the iop includes e-mail, face-
book, twitter, forums, linkedin, etc.
the internet of things (iot): all physical ob-
jects connected to the network. the iot in-
cludes all things that have a unique id and a
presence in an internet-like structure. things
may have an internet connection or be tagged us-ing radio-frequency identiﬁcation (rfid), near
field communication (nfc), etc.
theinternet of locations (iol): refers to all data
that have a spatial dimension. with the uptake
of mobile devices (e.g., smartphones) more and
more events have geospatial attributes.
process mining aims to exploit the ioe to learn
things related to the behavior of people, organiza-
tions, machines, and systems (aalst, 2011). the start-
ing point for process mining is an event log . each
event in such a log refers to an activity (i.e., a well-
deﬁned step in some process) and is related to a par-
ticular case (i.e., a process instance ). the events be-
longing to a case are ordered and can be seen as one
“run” of the process. event logs may store additional
information about events. in fact, whenever possible,
process-mining techniques use extra information such
as the resource (i.e., person or device) executing or
initiating the activity, the timestamp of the event, or
data elements recorded with the event (e.g., the size
of an order).
event logs are used to conduct four types of pro-
cess mining (see (aalst, 2011) for details):figure 1: a process model discovered by prom’s inductive miner (leemans et al., 2014). real cases (see yellow dots) are
replayed on the model to reveal bottlenecks and deviations.
the ﬁrst type of process mining is discovery . a
discovery technique takes an event log and pro-
duces a model without using any a priori informa-
tion (see fig. 1). process discovery is the most
prominent process-mining technique. for many
organizations it is surprising to see that existing
techniques are indeed able to discover real pro-
cesses merely based on example behaviors stored
in event logs.
the second type of process mining is confor-
mance . here, an existing process model is com-
pared with an event log of the same process. con-
formance checking can be used to check if reality,
as recorded in the log, conforms to the model and
vice versa.
the third type of process mining is enhancement .
here, the idea is to extend or improve an ex-
isting process model by directly using informa-
tion about the actual process recorded in some
event log. whereas conformance checking mea-
sures the alignment between model and reality,
this third type of process mining aims at changing
or extending the a priori model. for instance, by
using timestamps in the event log one can extend
the model to show bottlenecks, service levels, and
throughput times.
the fourth type of process mining is operational
support . the key difference with the former three
types is that analysis is not done off-line, but used
to inﬂuence the running process and its cases in
some way. based on process models, either dis-
covered through process mining or (partly) made
by hand, one can check, predict, or recommend
activities for running cases in an online setting.for example, based on the discovered model one
can predict that a particular case will be late and
propose counter-measures.
it is important to realize that the above types of
analysis are only possible due to the combination of
data and processes. next to “data scientists” there is
a need for “process scientists” that understand that
knowledge discovery should not shy away from the
complexities involving dynamic behavior. under-
standing the processes at hand is key when analyzing
systems, organizations, or human behavior.
2 how process mining is
different from ...?
this section positions process mining versus other ap-
proaches such as data mining, machine learning, busi-
ness intelligence, process modeling, and simulation
(see fig. 2). it is partly inspired by some of the blog
postings on fluxicon’s website that compare process
mining with other approaches, see (fluxicon, 2014).
2.1 process mining versus data mining
data mining techniques can be divided into super-
vised and unsupervised learning. for supervised
learning one needs labeled data (i.e., there is a re-
sponse variable that labels each instance) and the
goal is to explain this response variable (also called
the dependent variable) in terms of predictor vari-
ables (also called independent variables). classiﬁ-
cation techniques (e.g., decision tree learning) typi-
cally assume a categorical response variable (or theprocess 
miningdata 
miningmachine 
learning
simulation
process  
modelingbusiness 
intelligen-
cefigure 2: how process mining is different from ....
response variable is made categorical) and the goal is
to classify instances based on the predictor variables.
regression techniques assume a numerical response
variable. the goal is to ﬁnd a function that ﬁts the
data with the least error. unsupervised learning tech-
niques assume unlabeled data, i.e., the variables are
not split into response and predictor variables. ex-
amples include clustering (e.g., k-means clustering
and agglomerative hierarchical clustering) and pat-
tern discovery (e.g., association rules). although both
process mining and data mining start from data, data
mining techniques are typically notprocess-centric
and do notfocus on event data. for data mining tech-
niques the rows (instances) and columns (variables)
can mean anything. for process mining techniques,
we assume event data where events refer to process
instances and activities. moreover, the events are or-
dered and we are interested in end-to-end processes
rather than local patterns. end-to-end process mod-
els and concurrency are essential for process min-
ing. moreover, topics such as process discovery, con-
formance checking, and bottleneck analysis are not
addressed by traditional data mining techniques and
tools.
data mining and process mining are complemen-
tary approaches that can strengthen each other. for
example, consider the combined approach presented
in (leoni and aalst, 2013) that allows for decision
mining and performance prediction in a process con-
text.
2.2 process mining versus machine
learning
process discovery is the most visible form of pro-
cess mining. given an event log, a process model
is discovered. different notations are used as a rep-
resentational bias : various types petri nets (place-transition nets, workﬂow nets, colored nets, etc.),
business process model and notation (bpmn) di-
agrams, event-driven process chains (epcs), uml
activity diagrams, etc. some process discovery ap-
proaches use transition systems as an intermediate
format. learning a process model can be viewed as
a machine learning problem. however, process min-
ing extends far beyond process discovery. moreover,
classical machine learning approaches such as learn-
ing hidden markov models and language identiﬁca-
tion are signiﬁcantly different from process discov-
ery approaches such as the alpha algorithm, the ilp
miner, the inductive miner, the heuristic miner, and
the various genetic process mining algorithms (aalst,
2011). the well-known baum-welch algorithm is
an expectation-maximization (em) algorithm that,
given a set of observation sequences, derives a hid-
den markov model with a given number of states
that maximizes the probability of producing a collec-
tion of traces (alpaydin, 2010). unlike more recent
process mining approaches the resulting models are
sequential, i.e., concurrency and other higher level
control-ﬂow constructs cannot be discovered. many
inductive inference problems have been studied since
gold’s 1967 paper “language identiﬁcation in the
limit” (gold, 1967). the myhill-nerode theorem can
be used to minimize the transition system for regu-
lar languages, but cannot cope with noise and concur-
rency. the setting for such approaches is very differ-
ent from process mining. typically, no concurrency is
considered and the logs are assumed to be complete.
however, event logs, by deﬁnition, only contain ex-
ample behavior. this makes process mining also very
different from classical synthesis approaches for for-
mal models, e.g., the theory of regions for petri nets
(ehrenfeucht and rozenberg, 1989; cortadella et al.,
1998).
2.3 process mining versus business
intelligence
boris evelson of forrester research deﬁnes business
intelligence (bi) as “a set of methodologies, pro-
cesses, architectures, and technologies that transform
raw data into meaningful and useful information used
to enable more effective strategic, tactical, and op-
erational insights and decision making”. although
this deﬁnition does not exclude a process focus, bi
methodologies and tools are typically not process-
aware. bi products tend to focus on fancy-looking
dashboards and rather simple reports, rather than a
deeper analysis of the data collected. moreover, like
data mining, bi is not tailored towards the analysis of
event data.information 
systemoperational process
organization/
resources
process modelreal event data
process state
resource model
describe
configureinteract
record
usetraditional simulation 
(steady state, naive view of 
resources, only indirect use of 
historic information)advanced simulation 
(transient and steady state, 
refined view of resources, use 
of historic and state information)
enactment analysissimulation 
reportsimulated event 
dataunified view on 
simulated and 
real event datafigure 3: process mining enables non-traditional ways of using simulation. reality and simulated alternatives can both be
viewed using process mining, thus making comparison easy. moreover, operational support can realized using a combination
of historic and current data (aalst, 2014a).
2.4 process mining versus process
modeling
process mining is “evidence-based”, i.e., based on ob-
served behavior a model is discovered and evaluated.
process modeling approaches do not ensure a close
correspondence between reality and model. when
modeling processes the designer tends to concentrate
on the “normal” or “desirable” behavior. for exam-
ple, the model may only cover 80% of the cases as-
suming that these are most representative. typically
this is not the case as the other 20% may cause 80%
of the problems. abstraction is ﬁne, but simpliﬁed
models should be based on evidence and deviations
still need to be considered. the reasons for such
oversimpliﬁcations are manifold (aalst, 2011). the
designer and management may not be aware of the
many deviations that take place. moreover, the per-
ception of people may be biased depending on their
role in the organization. hand-made models tend to
be subjective, and often there is a tendency to make
things too simple just for the sake of understandabil-
ity. process mining, in particular the recently devel-
oped alignment-based approaches (aalst et al., 2012),
ensures a close correspondence between observed and
modeled behavior. moreover, event logs can be used
to “breathe life” into otherwise static process models
(aalst, 2011).
2.5 process mining versus simulation
process mining is based on facts, simulation results
are based on simulation models rather than event data.
the value of a simulation highly depends on the qual-
ity of the model. process mining is all about under-standing the current “as-is” processes. simulation is
more about playing out alternative “to-be” scenarios.
the simulation model ﬁrst aims to mimic the current
process and is then modiﬁed to estimate the effects
of changes (e.g., changes to the ordering of activities,
adding resources, or new priority rules). simulation
can greatly beneﬁt from process mining because pro-
cess mining can provide better initial models.
many organizations have purchased simulation
tools, but these are rarely used for two obvious rea-
sons: (a) it takes too much effort to build reliable
simulation models and (b) people often do not believe
simulation results because these are not based on real-
ity (the model can be tweaked to produce any result).
as discussed in (aalst, 2014a), process mining can
help to overcome these problems (see fig. 3).
3 conclusion
as argued in this paper, process mining is different
from data mining, machine learning, business intelli-
gence, process modeling, and simulation. although
process mining is often associated with these comple-
mentary approaches, existing tools for data mining,
machine learning, business intelligence, process mod-
eling, and simulation do not include techniques for
process discovery, conformance checking, etc. fig-
ure 4 shows the unique positioning of process mining
(aalst, 2011).
in recent years, academics working on business
process management (bpm) have embraced process
mining as a new and exciting technology. bpm is
a discipline involving any combination of modeling,
automation, execution, control, measurement and op-process 
mining
data-oriented analysis  process model analysis  
performance-
oriented 
questions, 
problems and 
solutionscompliance-
oriented 
questions, 
problems and 
solutions(simulation, verification, 
optimization, gaming, etc.)
(data mining, machine learning, 
business intelligence)figure 4: positioning process mining.
timization of business activity ﬂows, in support of
enterprise goals, spanning systems, employees, cus-
tomers and partners within and beyond the enterprise
boundaries (swenson, 2014). at academic bpm con-
ferences a considerable portion of papers is using or
proposing new process mining techniques. also pro-
cess mining tools are readily available. unfortunately,
the main bpm vendors are lagging behind and many
end-users are unaware of this more data-centric ap-
proach to process analysis.
process mining provides the glue between data &
process (linking event data to process models), busi-
ness & it (the evidence-based nature creates com-
mitment and makes both groups speak the same lan-
guage), bi & bpm, performance & compliance (de-
viations and bottlenecks are analyzed using the same
logs and tools), runtime & design time (process min-
ing can be applied on historic data and on running
cases), etc. this new glue provides a valuable set
of tools for a new profession: the “process scientist”.
process mining helps the process scientist to ﬁnd out
what organizations and people really do and use these
insights to improve things.
the fact that process mining problems can be de-
composed (aalst, 2013b; aalst, 2013a) also makes it
feasible to analyze “big event data”. the more ex-
ploratory types of process mining are often linear in
the size of the log. more precise techniques (e.g., for
conformance checking) require more computing time,
but can be distributed easily.
references
aalst, w. van der (2011). process mining: discov-
ery, conformance and enhancement of business
processes . springer-verlag, berlin.
aalst, w. van der (2013a). a general divide and con-
quer approach for process mining. in federated
conference on computer science and informa-tion systems (fedcsis 2013) , pages 1–10. ieee
computer society.
aalst, w. van der (2013b). decomposing petri nets
for process mining: a generic approach. dis-
tributed and parallel databases , 31(4):471–507.
aalst, w. van der (2014a). business process simu-
lation survival guide. in brocke, j. and rose-
mann, m., editors, handbook on business pro-
cess management , international handbooks on
information systems, springer-verlag, berlin.
aalst, w. van der (2014b). data scientist: the engi-
neer of the future. in proceedings of the i-esa
conference , volume 7 of enterprise interoper-
ability , pages 13–28. springer-verlag, berlin.
aalst, w. van der, adriansyah, a., and dongen, b.
van (2012). replaying history on process mod-
els for conformance checking and performance
analysis. wires data mining and knowledge
discovery , 2(2):182–192.
alpaydin, e. (2010). introduction to machine learn-
ing. mit press, cambridge, ma.
cortadella, j., kishinevsky, m., lavagno, l., and
yakovlev, a. (1998). deriving petri nets from
finite transition systems. ieee transactions
on computers , 47(8):859–882.
ehrenfeucht, a. and rozenberg, g. (1989). partial
(set) 2-structures - part 1 and part 2. acta infor-
matica , 27(4):315–368.
fluxicon (2014). flux capacitor: how is pro-
cess mining different http://fluxicon.com/
blog/ .
gold, e. (1967). language identiﬁcation in the limit.
information and control , 10(5):447–474.
leemans, s., fahland, d., and aalst, w. van der
(2014). discovering block-structured process
models from event logs containing infrequent
behaviour. in business process intelligence
(bpi 2014) , volume 171 of lecture notes in
business information processing , pages 66–78.
springer-verlag, berlin.
leoni, m. and aalst, w. van der (2013). data-aware
process mining: discovering decisions in pro-
cesses using alignments. in shin, s. and mal-
donado, j., editors, acm symposium on applied
computing (sac 2013) , pages 1454–1461. acm
press.
swenson, k. (2014). one common deﬁnition for
bpm. social-biz.org .