discovering, analyzing and enhancing bpmn models
using prom?
anna a. kalenkova1, massimiliano de leoni2;3, and wil m.p. van der aalst3;1
1national research university higher school of economics, moscow, 101000, russia
akalenkova@hse.ru
2university of padua, padua, italy
3eindhoven university of technology, eindhoven, the netherlands
fw.m.p.v.d.aalst,m.d.leoni g@tue.nl
abstract. process mining techniques relate observed behavior to modeled be-
havior, e.g., the automatic discovery of a process model based on an event log.
process mining is not limited to process discovery and also includes conformance
checking and model enhancement. conformance checking techniques are used to
diagnose the deviations of the observed behavior as recorded in the event log from
some process model. model enhancement allows to extend process models us-
ing additional perspectives, conformance and performance information. in recent
years, bpmn (business process model and notation) 2.0 has become a de facto
standard for modeling business processes in industry. this paper presents the
bpmn support current in prom. prom is the most known and used open-source
process mining framework. prom’s functionalities of discovering, analyzing and
enhancing bpmn models are discussed. support of the bpmn 2.0 standard will
help prom users to bridge the gap between formal models (such as petri nets,
causal nets and others) and process models used by practitioners.
1 overview
process aware information systems (pais) are increasingly used by organizations to
support their businesses. all these systems record the execution of process instances
in so-called event logs. these logs thus capture information about activities performed.
each event records the execution of an activity instance by a given resource at a certain
point in time along with the output produced. analyzing event logs, understanding and
improving processes based on facts are the primary objectives of process mining [9].
in this relatively short timespan, this discipline has proven to be capable of extracting
from event logs in-depth insights into process-related problems that contemporary en-
terprises face. through the application of process mining, organizations can discover
models of the processes as they were conducted in reality, check whether the actual ex-
ecutions comply with a prescribed process model, which encode certain practices and
regulations. furthermore, process mining allows analysts to gain insight into bottle-
necks, resource utilization, and other performance-related aspects of processes.
?this work is supported by the basic research program of the national research university
higher school of economics and by the eurostars-eureka project prompt (e!6696).most of the process-mining techniques usually need a process model as an input
or it produced as an output. the academic world has proposed many process-model
notations in the last years, such as petri nets, causal nets [4] and process trees [5].
nonetheless, the evidence is showing that, during the last years, bpmn (business pro-
cess model and notation) 2.0 [2] is becoming the de-facto standard for modeling busi-
ness processes in the industry. therefore, it seems crucial that every process-mining
technique is able to deal with bpmn models. unfortunately, these techniques have
been devised using different notations, which are often equivalent. to overcome this
problem, two solutions are possible: either these techniques are adapted to use a bpmn
model as input or produce one as output, or robust conversion mechanisms are provided
to convert process models from these alternative notations to the bpmn notation, and
vice versa.
this paper starts from the belief that the second solution is the most feasible. in this
paper, we discuss the operationalization of various techniques to convert models from
certain notations to bpmn. these conversions techniques have been implemented as
plugins for prom [3], a generic open-source framework for implementing process min-
ing tools in a standard environment. several companies and universities around the
globe have contributed to the prom development, designing and implementing plugins
to test their own process mining algorithms. the prom framework is based on the con-
cept of packages each of which is an aggregation of several plugins that are conceptually
related. in the latest version, 6.3, there are already more than 120 packages containing
more than 500 plugins available, operationalizing techniques in the entire spectrum of
process mining. by implementing our conversion techniques in prom, many of these
plugins can now produce bpmn models. furthermore, we extended prom to be able
to load and store bpmn models using standard formats (see later). in this way, the
discovered models can be loaded into an external bpmn modeling tool or into a work-
ﬂow engine that supports the execution of bpmn models. similarly, the bpmn models
drawn in external tools can be loaded in prom and used as an input for the diverse
process mining analysis.
last but not least, we have developed a technique to enhance a bpmn model us-
ing performance and conformance information. to analyze a process represented as a
bpmn model ﬁrst the model has to be converted to a corresponding petri net or other
formal model. after that this model is veriﬁed against the log, retrieving performance
characteristics (activities working times, frequencies and probabilities of occurrence in
a trace) and conformance information (deviations between the process model and the
log).
we support a large subset of the entire bpmn notation; in the addition of supporting
the control-ﬂow constructs (activities, connecting arcs and gateways), we also allow for
the different types of data objects, swimlanes, subprocesses and events. the structure
of the bpmn-related packages in prom is depicted in fig. 1. the core bpmn package
operates bpmn models and gives an ability to import and export bpmn diagrams in
bpmn xml 2.0 [2] and xpdl 2.2 [1] formats. other bpmn packages depend on this
package. the bpmn conversions package allows to construct bpmn-process models
from well-known control ﬂow modeling formalisms such as petri nets, causal nets [4]
and process trees [5].prom 
bpmn 
analysis 
package bpmn 
conversions 
package 
bpmn  
package «call» replay 
plugins 
«call» 
bpmn modeling tool import/export of bpmn 
diagrams in bpmn xml 2.0 
and xpdl 2.2 formats fig. 1: bpmn packages architecturethus, using bpmn conversions pack-
age, bpmn processes can be discovered. the
bpmn to petri net conversion was imple-
mented as well [6]1, this conversion can be
used to analyze bpmn diagrams. moreover,
the bpmn conversions package provides the
ability to enhance bpmn diagrams with data
and resource perspectives: data petri nets dis-
covered using the data-aware process mining
algorithm [8] can be converted to bpmn di-
agrams capturing both the control and data
perspectives (including data objects and gate-
way guards), process trees can be converted
to bpmn along with the resource nodes,
translating them to bpmn lanes. the bpmn
analysis package in its turn enhances bpmn
diagram by adding performance and confor-
mance (log and model discrepancies) infor-
mation. the core bpmn package supports
all main bpmn elements and has been con-
tinuously extended. the bpmn conversion
package offers fully implemented plugins for conversion between bpmn and formal
process models. the functionality of the bpmn analysis package is still being im-
proved and tested. all the plugins tailored towards working with bpmn in prom are
presented in table 1.
package name plugin name functionality
core bpmn package bpmn import/export
pluginsimplements import and export of bpmn diagrams
in bpmn xml 2.0 and xpdl 2.2 formats
bpmn conversions convert petri net converts a given petri net to a bpmn model
bpmn conversions convert data petri net converts a data petri net to a bpmn model with
data perspective
bpmn conversions convert causal net converts a causal net to a bpmn model
bpmn conversions convert process tree converts a process tree along with resource nodes
to a bpmn model with a resource perspective
bpmn conversions convert bpmn model to
petri net1converts a bpmn model to a corresponding petri
net
bpmn analysis analyze bpmn model enhances a bpmn model using performance and
conformance information
table 1: the list of bpmn plugins in prom
2 use cases
in this section we discuss usage scenarios of bpmn-related functionality of prom.
the scheme of usage of bpmn plugins in prom is presented in fig. 2. the user can
1a special thanks to dirk fahland, who has implemented the bpmn to petri net conversion
algorithm in prom.discover a bpmn model applying discovery and bpmn conversions plugins, after
that this model can be annotated with conformance and performance information.
event log 
causal net process tree 
(with resources)process discovery algorithms 
bpmn 
(with data perspective)conversions to bpmn 
petri net bpmn to petri net 
conversion 
evaluation of performance 
and conformance info 
performance and 
conformance info 
annotated 
bpmn bpmn conversions package petri net 
(with data)
add performance and conformance info bpmn analysis package 
fig. 2: functionality of bpmn conver-
sions and bpmn analysis packageslet us consider an example of construct-
ing a bpmn process model from an event
log. suppose that we have discovered a data
petri net using data-aware process mining al-
gorithm [8] (fig. 3 a.). a bpmn process
model constructed from the data petri net is
presented in fig. 3 b. this bpmn model can
be exported to an external bpmn modeling
tool such as signavio [7] (fig. 3 c.). this ex-
ample illustrates that the process discovered
from an event log can be ﬁnally represented
as a bpmn diagram with data and gateway
guards and loaded to an external bpmn tool
for further analysis or even execution.
the other possible usage is that the user
imports a bpmn model from an external
bpmn modeling tool (or discovers a bpmn
model using discovery and conversion plug-
ins), applies replay technique to retrieve per-
formance and conformance information and
annotate the bpmn diagram using this infor-
mation. figure 4 a. shows a bpmn process
model created in the signavio tool, this model is loaded to prom (figure 4 b.), and then
analysis techniques are applied: performance and conformance information for the en-
tire process model and each activity in particular are added to the diagram (figure 4 c.).
 
data petri net to 
bpm n conversion   
import to signavio   a.   
b.  c.  
fig. 3: discovering a bpmn model with data 
 
 
export from sign av io   
replaying        
addition of 
conformance and 
performance info  a.   b.  
c.  fig. 4: analysis of a bpmn model
the entire support for bpmn discussed in this paper is available in the nightly build of
prom and is mature enough to be applied to real business cases. readers can learn how
to install and try out the bpmn support for prom at http://pais.hse.ru/en/
research/projects/hlm . at the same link, a screencast video and a presentation
are available, showing the application of the two use cases discussed in section 2.
references
1. process deﬁnition interface – xml process deﬁnition language (xpdl) 2.2. http://
www.xpdl.org/ .
2. business process model and notation (bpmn). http://www.omg.org/spec/bpmn/
2.0/ .
3. prom tool 6.3. http://www.promtools.org/prom6/ .
4. w.m.p. van der aalst, a. adriansyah, and b.f. van dongen. causal nets: a modeling lan-
guage tailored towards process discovery. in j.p. katoen and b. koenig, editors, 22nd inter-
national conference on concurrency theory (concur 2011) , pages 28–42, 2011.
5. w.m.p. van der aalst, j. buijs, and b.f. van dongen. towards improving the representational
bias of process mining. in k. aberer, e. damiani, and t. dillon, editors, ifip international
symposium on data-driven process discovery and analysis (simpda 2011) , volume 116,
pages 39–54, 2012.
6. c. favre, d.fahland, and h.v olzer. the relationship between workﬂow graphs and free-choice
workﬂow nets. information systems , elsevier (2014) in press.
7. m. kunze and m. weske. signavio-oryx academic initiative. in proceedings of the demo
track of bpm 2010 , volume 615 of ceur workshop proceedings . ceur-ws.org, 2010.
8. m. de leoni and w.m.p. van der aalst. data-aware process mining: discovering decisions
in processes using alignments. in s.y . shin and j.c. maldonado, editors, acm symposium
on applied computing (sac 2013) , pages 1454–1461. acm press, 2013.
9. wil m. p. van der aalst. process mining - discovery, conformance and enhancement of
business processes. springer, 2011.