decomposing alignment-based conformance checking
of data-aware process models
massimiliano de leoni1?, jorge munoz-gama2??, josep carmona2, and
wil m.p. van der aalst1
1eindhoven university of technology, eindhoven (the netherlands)
2universitat polit `ecnica de catalunya, barcelona (spain)
m.d.leoni@tue.nl ,jmunoz@cs.upc.edu ,jcarmona@cs.upc.edu ,
w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tue.nl
abstract. process mining techniques relate observed behavior to modeled be-
havior, e.g., the automatic discovery of a petri net based on an event log. process
mining is not limited to process discovery and also includes conformance check-
ing. conformance checking techniques are used for evaluating the quality of dis-
covered process models and to diagnose deviations from some normative model
(e.g., to check compliance). existing conformance checking approaches typically
focus on the control-ﬂow, thus being unable to diagnose deviations concerning
data. this paper proposes a technique to check the conformance of data-aware
process models. we use so-called petri nets with data to model data variables,
guards, and read/write actions. data-aware conformance checking problem may
be very time consuming and sometimes even intractable when there are many
transitions and data variables. therefore, we propose a technique to decompose
large data-aware conformance checking problems into smaller problems that can
be solved more efﬁciently. we provide a general correctness result showing that
decomposition does not inﬂuence the outcome of conformance checking. the
approach is supported through prom plug-ins and experimental results show sig-
niﬁcant performance improvements. experiments have also been conducted with
a real-life case study, thus showing that the approach is also relevant in real busi-
ness settings.
keywords: process mining, conformance checking, divide-and-conquer tech-
niques, multi-perspective process modelling
1 introduction
nowadays, most organizations document and analyze their processes in some form,
and with it, the practical relevance of process mining is increasing as more and more
event data becomes available. process mining techniques aim to discover, monitor and
improve real processes by extracting knowledge from event logs. the two most promi-
nent process mining tasks are: (i) process discovery: learning a process model from
example behavior recorded in an event log, and (ii) conformance checking: diagnosing
?when conducting most of this research work, dr. de leoni was also afﬁliated with university
of padua and ﬁnancially supported by the eurostars - eureka project prompt (e!6696).
??supported by fpu grant (ap2009-4959) and project formalism (tin-2007-66523)credit 
request 
(a)verify
 (b)assessment 
(c)positive 
vefication
register 
negative 
verification (d)negative 
verificationinform requester 
(e)
renegotiate 
request(f)register 
negative 
request (g)negative 
decision
open credit 
(h) positive
decision
amount (a)interest (i)
decision (d)
verification (v) 0.1 amount < interest < 0.2 amount
the renegotiated amount is 
smaller than the original 
amountdecision = negativefig. 1: example of a (simpliﬁed) process to request loans. the dotted arcs going from
a transition to a variable denote write operations; the arcs towards a transition denote
read operations, i.e. the transition requires accessing the current variables’ value. in the
paper, each transition is abbreviated into a lower-case letter (e.g. a) and each variable
is represented as a upper-case letter (e.g. a). the abbreviations are shown in brackets
after the name of the transitions or variable names.
and quantifying discrepancies between observed behavior and modeled behavior [1].
models that faithfully conform the reality are necessary to obtain trustful analysis and
simulation results, for certiﬁcation and regulation purposes, or simply to gain insight
into the process.
most of the work done in conformance checking in the literature focuses on the
control-ﬂow of the underlying process, i.e. the ordering of activities. there are various
approaches to compute the fraction of events or traces in the log that can be replayed
by the model [2,3].
in a data-aware process model, each case, i.e. a process instance, is characterized
by its case variables. paths taken during the execution may be governed by guards and
conditions deﬁned over such variables. a process model speciﬁes the set of variables
and their possible values, guards, and write/read actions. since existing conformance
checking techniques typically completely abstract from data, resources, and time, many
deviations remain undetected. therefore, the event log may record executions of process
instances that appear fully conforming, even when it is not the case. rigorous analysis
of the data perspective is needed to reveal such deviations.
let us consider the process that is modeled as bpmn diagram in figure 1. it mod-
els the handling of loans requests from customers. it is deliberately oversimpliﬁed to
be able to explain the concepts more easily. the process starts with a credit request
where the requestor provides some documents to demonstrate the capability of paying
the loan back. these documents are veriﬁed and the interest amount is also computed.
if the veriﬁcation step is negative, a negative decision is made, the requestor is informed
and, ﬁnally, the negative outcome of the request is stored in the system. if veriﬁcationis positive, an assessment is made to take a ﬁnal decision. independently of the assess-
ment’s decision, the requestor is informed. moreover, even if the veriﬁcation is negative,
the requestor can renegotiate the loan (e.g. to have lower interests) by providing further
documents or by asking for a smaller amount. in this case, the veriﬁcation-assessment
part is repeated. if both the decision and veriﬁcation are positive and the requestor is
not willing to renegotiate, the credit is opened. let us consider the following trace:3
ex=h(a;;;f(a;4000)g);(b;f(a;4000)g;f(i;450);(v;false)g);(c;f(v;false)g;
f(d;true)g);(e;;;;);(f;f(a;4000)g;f(a;5000)g);(b;f(a;5000)g;f(i;450);
(v;false)g);(d;f(v;false)g;f(d;false)g);(e;;;;);(h;f(d;true)g;;)i
seen from a control-ﬂow perspective only (i.e. only considering the activities’ order-
ing), the trace seems to be fully conforming. nonetheless, a number of deviations can
be noticed if the data perspective is considered. first of all, if activity cis executed,
previously activity bcould not have resulted in a negative veriﬁcation, i.e. vis set to
false . second, activity fcannot write value 5000 to variablea, as this new value is
larger than the previous value, i.e. 4000 . furthermore, if the decision and veriﬁcation
are both negative, i.e. both varedare set to false , thenhcannot be executed at the
end.
the identiﬁcation of non-conforming traces clearly has value in itself. nonetheless,
organizations are often interested in explanations that can steer measures to improve
the quality of the process. alignments aim to support more reﬁned conformance check-
ing. an alignment aligns a case in the event log with an execution path of the process
model as good as possible. if the case deviates from the model, then it is not possible
to perfectly align with the model and a best matching scenario is selected. note that
for the same deviation, multiple explanations can be given. for instance, the problem
thathwas executed when it was not supposed to happen can be explained in two ways:
(1)hshould not have occurred because vanddare both set to false (“control-ﬂow is
wrong”) and (2) vanddshould both have been set to true because hoccurs (“data-ﬂow
is wrong”). in order to decide for the most reasonable explanation, costs are assigned
to deviations and we aim to ﬁnd the explanation with the lowest cost. for instance, if
assigning a wrong value to vanddis less severe than executing hwrongly, the sec-
ond explanation is preferred. the seminal work in [3] only considers alignments in the
control-ﬂow part, thus ignoring the data-perspective aspect of conformance.
as we detail in section 2.4, ﬁnding an alignment of an event log and a data-aware
process model is undecidable in the general case. however, to make the problem decid-
able, works [4,5] put forward the limitation that guards need to be linear (in)equations.
readers are also referred to them for a state-of-the-art analysis of data-aware confor-
mance checking. these works also show that, even with that limitation, the problem
of ﬁnding an alignment of an event log can become intractable since the problem’s
complexity is exponential on the size of the model, i.e. the number of activities and data
variables. in this paper, while keeping the limitations mentioned above, we aim to speed
3notation (act; r; w)is used to denote the occurrence of activity actthat writes and reads
variables according to functions wandr, e.g., (b;f(a;4000)g;f(i;450);(v;false)g)is an
event corresponding to the occurrence of activity bwhile reading value 4000 for variable a
and writing values 450 and false to variables iandvrespectively. (e;;;;)corresponds to the
occurrence of activity ewithout reading/writing any variables.     complete     
log    
l      1      m      1    
     ...    
     l      n         m      n         ...        control-flow    
model       control-flow    
log   
    conformance   
    l       m   [3]
    multi-perspective    
log       multi-perspective    
model   
    conformance   
    l       m   [4,5]    l     1       m     1   
    ...   
    l     n       m     n       ...   
[6,7,8]fig. 2: positioning the contribution of this paper with respect to the state of the art: the
gray area identiﬁes the novelty of the proposed technique.
up the computation of alignments by using a divide-and-conquer approach. the data-
aware process model is split into smaller partly overlapping model fragments. for each
model fragment a sublog is created by projecting the initial event log onto the activities
used in the fragment. given the exponential nature of conformance checking, this may
signiﬁcantly reduce the computation time. if the decomposition is done properly, then
any trace that ﬁts into the overall model also ﬁts all of the smaller model fragments
and vice versa. figure 2 positions the contribution of this paper with respect to the
state-of-the-art alignment-based techniques. the top part identiﬁes the alignment-based
conformance checking that considers the control ﬂow, only. the bottom part refers to
the alignment-based conformance checking techniques that account for data, as well.
regarding the control-ﬂow only, several approaches have been proposed to decompose
process mining problems, both for discovery and conformance checking. as described
in [6], it is possible to decompose process mining problems in a variety of ways. spe-
cial cases of this more general theory are passages [7] and sese-based decomposition
[8]. however, these approaches are limited to control-ﬂow. indeed, some techniques
exist that also consider the data aspects (i.e. [4,5]) but without exploiting the possibility
of decomposing the data-aware model. in this paper, we extend the control-ﬂow ap-
proaches mentioned above to also take data into account, which coincides with the gray
area in figure 2. finally, the work in [9] (and similar) for data-aware conformance on
declarative models is orthogonal to the contributions listed in figure 2, that are focused
on procedural models.
the decomposed data-aware conformance checking approach presented in this pa-
per has been implemented as plug-ins for the prom framework. we conducted exper-
iments related to a real-life case study as well as with several synthetic event logs.
experimental results show that data-aware decomposition may indeed be used to sig-
niﬁcantly reduce the time needed for conformance checking and that the problem is
practically relevant since models of real processes can actually be decomposed.
preliminaries are presented in section 2. section 3 introduces our approach for data-
aware decomposition. section 4 describes different algorithms for instantiating the gen-eral results presented in section 3. section 5 reports on experimental results. section 6
concludes the paper.
2 preliminaries
2.1 system nets
petri nets and their semantics are deﬁned as usual: a petri net is a tuple (p;t;f )with
pthe set of places, tthe set of transitions, p\t=;, andf(pt)[(tp)the
ﬂow relation. a place pis an input place of a transition tiff(p;t)2f; similarly,pis an
output place of tiff(t;p)2f. the marking of a petri net is a multiset of tokens, i.e.,
m2i b(p). for some multiset m2i b(p),m(p)denotes the number of times element
pappears inm. the standard set operators can be extended to multisets, m1]m2is
the union of two multisets.
firing a transition tin a marking mconsumes one token from each of its input
places and produces one token in each of its output places. furthermore, transition t
is enabled and may ﬁre in mif there are enough tokens in its input places for the
consumptions to be possible, i.e. iff for each input place soft,m(s)1. some of
the transitions corresponds to piece of work in the process; each of those transitions are
associated with a label that indicates the activity that it represents.
deﬁnition 1 (labeled petri net). a labeled petri net pn= (p;t;f;l )is a petri net
(p;t;f )with labeling function l2t6!uawhereuais some universe of activity
labels.4
transitions without a label are invisible transitions, also known as -transitions. they
are introduced for routing purposes but they do not represent actual pieces of work. as
such, their execution is not recorded in the event logs.
deﬁnition 2 (system net). a system net sn= (pn;minit;mnal)is a triplet where
pn= (p;t;f;l )is a labeled petri net, minit2i b(p)is the initial marking, and
mnal2i b(p)is the ﬁnal marking. usnis the universe of system nets .
deﬁnition 3 (system net notations). letsn= (pn;minit;mnal)2u snbe a
system net with pn= (p;t;f;l ).
–tv(sn) =dom(l)is the set of visible transitions insn,
–av(sn) =rng(l)is the set of corresponding observable activities insn,
–tu
v(sn) =ft2tv(sn)j8t02tv(sn)l(t) =l(t0))t=t0gis the set of unique
visible transitions in sn(i.e., there are no other transitions having the same visible
label), and
–au
v(sn) =fl(t)jt2tu
v(sn)gis the set of corresponding unique observable
activities in sn.
in the remainder, for the formal deﬁnitions and proved theorems in section 3, we
need to introduce the concept of union of two nets. for this, we need to merge labeling
functions. for any two partial functions f12x16!y1andf22x26!y2:f3=
4symbol6!is used to denote partial functions.n1 n2n3 n5 n6
credit requestregister negative 
verificationinform requester
renegotiateopen credit loan assessmentinterests
amountverification
decision
register negative request register negative request 
n4n4verify verifyfig. 3: pictorial representation of a petri net with data that models the process earlier
described in terms of bpmn diagram (cf. figure 1). places, transitions and variables
are represented as circles, rectangles and triangles, respectively. the dotted arcs going
from a transition to a variable denote the writing operations; the reverse arcs denote the
read operations, i.e. the transition requires accessing the current variables’ value.
f1f2is the union of the two functions. f32(x1[x2)6!(y1[y2),dom(f3) =
dom(f1)[dom(f2),f3(x) =f2(x)ifx2dom(f2), andf3(x) =f1(x)ifx2
dom(f1)ndom(f2).
deﬁnition 4 (union of nets). letsn1= (n1;m1
init;m1
nal)2u snwithn1=
(p1;t1;f1;l1)andsn2= (n2;m2
init;m2
nal)2usnwithn2= (p2;t2;f2;l2)
be two system nets.
–l3=l1l2is the union of l1andl2,
–n1[n2= (p1[p2;t1[t2;f1[f2;l3)is the union of n1andn2, and
–sn1[sn2= (n1[n2;m1
init]m2
init;m1
nal]m2
nal)is the union of system
netssn1andsn2.
2.2 petri nets with data
a petri net with data is a petri net with any number of variables (see deﬁnitions 5 and
6 below). petri nets with data can be seen as an abstracted version of high-level/colored
petri nets [10]. colored petri nets are extremely rich in expressiveness; however, many
aspects are unimportant in our setting. petri nets with data provide precisely the infor-
mation needed for conformance checking of data-aware models and logs.
deﬁnition 5 (variables and values). uvnis the universe of variable names. uvvis
the universe of values. uvm=uvn6!u vvis the universe of variable mappings.
in this type of nets, transitions may read from and/or write to variables. moreover, tran-
sitions are associated with guards over these variables, which deﬁne when these they
can ﬁre. a guard can be any formula over the process variables using relational oper-
ators (<;>; =) as well as logical operators such as conjunction ( ^), disjunction (_),and negation (:). a variable vappear asvrorvw, denoting the values read and written
by the transition for v. we denote with formulas (v)the universe of such formulas
deﬁned over a set vof variables. in the remainder, given a set vu vnof variable
names, we denote vr=fvr:v2vgandvw=fvw:v2vg.
formally, a petri net with data (dpn) is deﬁned as follows:
deﬁnition 6 (petri net with data). a petri net with data dpn = (sn;v; val;init;
read;write;guard )consists of
–a system net sn= (pn;minit;mnal)withpn= (p;t;f;l ),
–a setvu vnof data variables,
–a function val2v!p(uvv)that deﬁnes the values admissible for each vari-
able, i.e., val(v)is the set of values that variable vcan have,5
–a function init2v!u vvthat deﬁnes the initial value for each variable vsuch
thatinit(v)2val(v)(initial values are admissible),
–a read function read2t! p (v)that labels each transition with the set of
variables that it reads,
–a write function write2t!p (v)that labels each transition with the set of
variables that it writes,
–a guard function guard2t!formulas (vw[vr)that associates a guard
with each transition such that, for any t2tand for any v2v, ifvrappears in
guard (t)thenv2read(t)and ifvwappears in guard (t)thenv2write (t).
udpn is the universe of petri nets with data .
the notion of bindings is essential for the remainder. a binding is a triplet (t;r;w )
describing the execution of transition twhile reading values rand writing values w. a
binding is valid if:
1.r2read(t)!u vvandw2write (t)!u vv
2. for anyv2read(t):r(v)2val(v), i.e., all values read should be admissible,
3. for anyv2write (t):w(v)2val(v), i.e., all values written should be admissible.
4. guard guard (t)evaluate true.
more speciﬁcally, let us introduce variable assignment b: (vr[vw)6!u vv)which
is deﬁned as follows: for any v2read(t),(vr) =r(v)and, for any v2write (t),
(vw) =w(v). a binding (t;r;w )makes guard (t)evaluate true if the evaluation of
guard (t)wrt.breturns true.
a marking (m;s)of a petri net with data dpn has two components: m2i b(p)
is the control-ﬂow marking ands2u vmwithdom(s) =vands(v)2val(v)for
allv2vis the data marking . the initial marking of a petri net with data dpn
is(minit;init). recall that init is a function that deﬁnes the initial value for each
variable.
(dpn;(m;s))[bidenotes that a binding bis enabled in marking (m;s), which in-
dicates that each of its input places tcontains at least one token (control-ﬂow enabled),
bis valid and and sread (t)=r(the actual values read match the binding).6
5p(x)is the powerset of x, i.e.,y2p(x)is and only if yx.
6fqis the function projected on q:dom(fq) =dom(f)\qandfq(x) =f(x)for
x2dom(fq). projection can also be used for bags and sequences, e.g., [x3; y; z2]fx;yg=
[x3; y]andhy; z; yifx;yg=hy; yi.table 1: deﬁnitions of the guards of the transitions in fig. 3. variables and transition
names are abbreviated as described in figure 1. subscripts randwrefer to, respectively,
the values read and written for that given variable.
transition guard
credit request true
verify 0:1ar< iw<0:2ar
assessment vr=true
register negative veriﬁcation vr=false^dw=false
inform requester true
renegotiate request vr=false^aw< ar
register negative request dr=false
open credit dr=true
an enabled binding b= (t;r;w )may occur , i.e., one token is removed from each
of the input places tand one token is produced for each of the output places t. more-
over, the variables are updated as speciﬁed by w. formally:m0= (mnt)]tis
the control-ﬂow marking resulting from ﬁring enabled transition tin markingm(ab-
stracting from data) and s0=swis the data marking where s0(v) =w(v)for allv2
write (t)ands0(v) =s(v)for allv2vnwrite (t).(dpn;(m;s))[bi(dpn;(m0;s0))
denotes that bis enabled in (m;s)and the occurrence of bresults in marking (m0;s0).
figure 3 shows a petri net with data dpnexthat models the same process as
represented in figure 1 as bpmn diagram, and table 1 illustrates the conditions of the
guards of the transitions of dpnex. the labeling function lis such that the domain of
lis the set of transitions of dpnexand, for each transition tofdpnex,l(t) =t. in
other words, the set of activity labels coincides with the set of transitions.
letb=hb1;b2;:::;bnibe a sequence of bindings. (dpn;(m;s))[bi(dpn;
(m0;s0))denotes that there is a set of markings (m0;s0);(m1;s1);:::; (mn;sn)such
that(m0;s0) = (m;s),(mn;sn) = (m0;s0), and(dpn;(mi;si))[bi+1i(dpn;(mi+1;si+1))
for0i < n . a marking (m0;s0)isreachable from (m;s)if there exists a bsuch
that(dpn;(m;s))[bi(dpn;(m0;s0)).
f(dpn ) =fbj9s(dpn;(minit;init))[bi(dpn;(mnal;s))gis the set of
complete binding sequences , thus describing the behavior of dpn .
deﬁnition 7 (union of petri nets with data). letdpn1= (sn1;v1;val1;init1;read1;
write1;guard1)anddpn2= (sn2;v2;val2;init2;read2;write2;guard2)with
v1\v2=;.dpn1[dpn2= (sn1[sn2;v1[v2;val1val2;init1init2;
read3;write3;guard3)is the union such that
–read3(t) =read1(t),write3(t) =write1(t), and guard3(t) =guard1(t)ift2
t1nt2,
–read3(t) =read2(t),write3(t) =write2(t), and guard3(t) =guard2(t)ift2
t2nt1, and
–read3(t) = read1(t)[read2(t),write3(t) = write1(t)[write2(t), and
guard3(t) =guard1(t)guard2(t)ift2t1\t2.2.3 event logs and relating models to event logs
next we introduce event logs and relate them to the observable behavior of a dpn .
deﬁnition 8 (trace, event log with data). a trace2(uau vmu vm)is a
sequence of activities with input and output data. l2i b((uau vmu vm))is an
event log with read and write information, i.e., a multiset of traces with data.
deﬁnition 9 (from bindings to traces). consider a petri net with data with transi-
tionstand labeling function l2t6!ua. a binding sequence b2(tu vm
uvm)can be converted into a trace v2(uau vmu vm)by removing the
bindings that correspond to unlabeled transitions and by mapping the labeled transi-
tions onto their corresponding label. l(b)denotes the corresponding trace v.
note that we overload the labeling function to binding sequences, v=l(b). this
is used to deﬁne (dpn ): the set of all visible traces.
deﬁnition 10 (observable behavior of a petri net with data). letdpn be a petri
net with data. (dpn;(m;s))[v(dpn;(m0;s0))if and only if there is a sequence
bsuch that (dpn;(m;s))[bi(dpn;(m0;s0))andv=l(b).(dpn ) =fl(b)j
b2f(dpn )gis the set of visible traces starting in (minit;init)and ending in
(mnal;s)for some data marking s.
deﬁnition 11 (perfectly fitting with data). a trace2(uau vmu vm)is
perfectly ﬁtting dpn2u dpn if2(dpn ). an event log l2i b((uau vm
uvm))is perfectly ﬁtting dpn if all of its traces are perfectly ﬁtting.
later, we will need to project binding sequences and traces onto subsets of tran-
sitions/activities and variables. therefore, we introduce a generic projection operator
y;v()that removes transitions/activities not in yand variables not in v.
deﬁnition 12 (projection). letxbe a set of transitions or activities (i.e., xtor
xua). letyxbe a subset and vu vna subset of variable names. let
2(xu vmu vm)be a binding sequence or a trace with data. y;v()2
(y(v6!u vv)(v6!u vv))is the projection of onto transitions/activities y
and variables v. bindings/events unrelated to transitions/activities in yare removed
completely. moreover, for the remaining bindings/events all read and write variables
not invare removed. y;v(l) = [y;v()j2l]lifts the projection operator to
the level of logs.
2.4 alignments
conformance checking requires an alignment of event log land process model dpn ,
that is the alignment of each single trace 2land process model dpn .
the events in the event log need to be related to transitions in the model, and vice
versa. such an alignment shows how the event log can be replayed on the process model.
building this alignment is far from trivial, since the log may deviate from the model at
an arbitrary number of places. we need to relate “moves” in the log to “moves” in the
model in order to establish an alignment between a process model and an event log. it
may be that some of the moves in the log cannot be mimicked by the model and vice
versa. we denote such “no moves” by . an alignment is a sequence of moves:table 2: examples of complete alignments of example andn. for readability, the read
operations are omitted. of course, read operations for any variable must match the most
recent value for that variable. any move is highlighted with a gray color if it contains
deviations, i.e. it is not a move in both without incorrect read/write operations.
(a)
event-log trace process
(a,f(a,4000)g) (a,f(a,4000)g)
(b,f(i,450),(v , false )g)(b,f(i,450),(v , true)g)
(c,f(d,true)g) (c,f(d,true)g)
(e,;) (e,;)
(f,f(a,5000)g) (f,f(a,3000)g)
(b,f(i,450),(v , false )g)(b,f(i,450),(v , false )g)
(d,f(d,false )g) (d,f(d,false )g)
(e,;) (e,;)
(h,;)
 (g,;)(b)
event-log trace process
(a,f(a,4000)g) (a,f(a,5100)g)
(b,f(i,450),(v , false )g)(b,f(i,511),(v , true)g)
(c,f(d,true)g) (c,f(d,true)g)
(e,;) (e,;)
(f,f(a,5000)g) (f,f(a,5000)g)
(b,f(i,450),(v , false )g)(b,f(i,511),(v , false )g)
(d,f(d,false )g) (d,f(d,false )g)
(e,;) (e,;)
(h,;)
 (g,;)
deﬁnition 13 (legal alignment moves). let dpn = (sn;v;val;init;
read;write;guard )be a petri net with data, with sn= (pn;minit;mnal)and
pn= (p;t;f;l ). letsl=uauvmuvmbe the universe of events. let sdpn =
tuvmuvmbe the universe of bindings of dpn . let bes
dpn =sdpn[fg
ands
l=sl[fg .
a legal move in an alignment is represented by a pair (sl;sm)2(s
ls
dpn)n
f(;)gsuch that
–(sl;sm)is amove in log ifsl2slandsm=,
–(sl;sm)is amove in model ifsl=andsm2sdpn ,
–(sl;sm)is amove in both without incorrect read/write operations ifsm= (t;r;w )2
sdpn andsl= (l(t);r;w)2sl,
–(sl;sm)is amove in both with incorrect read/write operations ifsm= (t;r;w )2
sdpn andsl= (l(t);r0;w0)2sl, andr6=r0orw6=w0.
all other moves are considered as illegal .
deﬁnition 14 (alignments). letdpn = (sn;v;val;init;read;write;guard )be a
petri net with data and 2(sl)be an event-log trace. let adpn be the set of legal
moves for dpn . acomplete alignment oflanddpn is a sequence 2adpn
such that, ignoring all occurrences of , the projection on the ﬁrst element yields l
and the projection on the second yields a p2f(dpn ).
table 2 shows two complete alignments of the process model in figure 3 and the
log traceexfrom section 1.
in order to deﬁne the severity of a deviation, we introduce a cost function on legal
moves:2adpn!r+
0. this cost function can be used to favor one type of expla-
nation for deviations over others. the cost of each legal move depends on the speciﬁc
model and process domain and, hence, the cost function needs to be deﬁned speciﬁ-
cally for each setting. the cost of an alignment is the sum of the cost of all individual
moves composing it: k() =p
(sl;sm)2(sl;sm).
however, we do not aim to ﬁnd just any complete alignment. our goal is to ﬁnd a
complete alignment of landdpn which minimizes the cost: an optimal alignment.let l;nbe the (inﬁnite)set of all complete alignments of landdpn . the align-
ment2 l;dpn is an optimal alignment if, for all02 l;n,k()k(0). note
that an optimal alignment does not need to be unique, i.e. multiple complete alignments
with the same minimal cost may exist.
let us consider again our example introduced above. let us assume to have a cost
functionssuch thats(sl;sm) = 1 if(sl;sm)is a visible move in process or a
move in log (i.e. sl=andsmcorresponds to a labeled transition or, conversely,
sm=, respectively) or a move in both with incorrect read/write operations and
s(sl;sm) = 0 in case of move in both without incorrect read/write operations or
a move in model corresponding to an unlabeled transition. the alignment in table 2a
has a cost of 6 whereas the alignment in table 2b has a cost 8.7it follows that the former
is a better alignment. as a matter of fact, it is also an optimal alignment, although it is
not the only one. for instance, any variation of such an alignment where the move
forfis of the form (now including read operations) ((f;f(a;4000)g;f(a;5000)g)
(f;f(a;4000)g;f(a;x)g)g))with2250<x< 4000 corresponds to an optimal align-
ment, as well.
in section 1, we have mentioned that the data-aware conformance checking is un-
decidable in the general case. this is caused by the fact that petri nets with data are
turing-complete. therefore, it is not decidable to verify whether a sequence of valid
bindings exists that takes from the initial marking to any ﬁnal marking (mfinal;s). as
a consequence, for instance, it is not possible to ﬁnd an alignment of a petri net with
data and the empty log trace. as mentioned in section 1, the problem becomes decid-
able (with an exponential complexity) if guards are restricted to linear (in)equalities.
3 valid decomposition of data-aware models
in [6] the author deﬁnes valid decomposition in terms of petri nets: the overall system
netsnis decomposed into a collection of subnets fsn1;sn2;:::; snngsuch that the
union of these subnets yields the original system net. a decomposition is valid if the
subnets “agree” on the original labeling function (i.e., the same transition always has
the same label), each place resides in just one subnet, and also each invisible transition
resides in just one subnet. moreover, if there are multiple transitions with the same
label, they should reside in the same subnet. only unique visible transitions can be
shared among different subnets.
deﬁnition 15 (valid decomposition for petri nets [6]). letsn2u snbe a system
net with labeling function l.d=fsn1;sn2;:::; snngu snis a valid decompo-
sition if and only if:
–sni= (ni;mi
init;mi
nal)is a system net with ni= (pi;ti;fi;li)for all 1
in,
–li=ltifor all 1in,
–pi\pj=;for1i<jn,
–ti\tjtu
v(sn)for1i<jn,
–rng(li)\rng(lj)tu
v(sn)for1i<jn, and
7they also include a cost of two that is accounted for incorrect read operations, not shown in
the alignments, which are caused by incorrect write operations.–sn=s
1insni.
d(sn)is the set of all valid decompositions of sn.
from the deﬁnition the following properties follow:
1. each place appears in precisely one of the subnets, i.e., for any p2p:jf1i
njp2pigj= 1,
2. each invisible transition appears in precisely one of the subnets, i.e., for any t2
tntv(sn):jf1injt2tigj= 1,
3. all visible transitions with the same label (i.e. the label is not unique) appear in
the same subnet, i.e., for any a2av(sn)nau
v(sn):jf1inj 9t2
tv(sn)\ti; l(t)gj= 1,
4. visible transitions having a unique label may appear in multiple subnets, i.e., for
anyt2tu
v(sn):jf1injt2tigj1, and
5. each edge appears in precisely one of the subnets, i.e., for any (x;y)2f:jf1
inj(x;y)2figj= 1.
as shown in [6], these observations imply that conformance checking can be de-
composed. any trace that ﬁts the overall process model can be decomposed into smaller
traces that ﬁt the individual model fragments. moreover, if the smaller traces ﬁt the in-
dividual fragments, then they can be composed into a trace that ﬁts into the overall
process model. this result is the basis for decomposing process mining problems.
theorem 1 (conformance checking can be decomposed [6]). letl2i b(a)be
an event log with auaand let sn2usnbe a system net. for any valid decompo-
sitiond=fsn1;sn2;:::; snng2d (sn):lis perfectly ﬁtting system net snif
and only if for all 1in: the projection of lontoav(sni)is perfectly ﬁtting sni.
in this paper, the deﬁnition of valid decomposition is extended to cover petri nets
with data.
deﬁnition 16 (valid decomposition for petri nets with data). letdpn2u dpn
be a petri net with data. d=fdpn1;dpn2;:::; dpnngu dpn is a valid de-
composition if and only if:
–for all 1in:dpni= (sni;vi;vali;initi;readi;writei;guardi)is a
petri net with data, sni= (pni;mi
init;mi
nal)2 u snis a system net, and
pni= (pi;ti;fi;li)is a labeled petri net,
–d0=fsn1;sn2;:::; snngu snis a valid decomposition ofs
1insni,
–vi\vj=;for1i<jn,
–dpn =s
1indpni.
d(dpn )is the set of all valid decompositions of dpn .
each variable appears in precisely one of the subnets. therefore, there cannot be two
fragments that read and or write the same data variables:s
t2tireadi(t)[writei(t)t
s
t2tjreadj(t)[writej(t) =;for1i < jn. moreover, two guards in
different fragments cannot refer to the same variable. if a transition tappears in multiple
fragments, then it needs to have a visible unique label as shown in [6]. such a uniquely
labeled transition tshared among fragments, may use, read, or write different variables
in different fragments. since dpn =s
1indpni, we know that, for all tindpn ,
guard (t)is the product of all guardi(t)such thatt2ti. without loss of generalitywe can assume that the ﬁrst kfragments share t. hence, guard (t) =guard1(t):::
guardk(t). hence, in a valid decomposition, the guard of a shared transition can only
be split if the different parts do not depend on one another. notice that, the splitting
of the data variables is limited by how the variables are used throughout the process,
existing a worst-case where all the data variables are used in all the steps of the process.
based on these observations, we prove that we can decompose conformance check-
ing also for petri nets with data.
theorem 2 (conformance checking with data can be decomposed). letl2
i b((uau vmu vm))be an event log with information about reads and writes
and let dpn2u dpn be a petri net with data. for any valid decomposition d=
fdpn1;dpn2;:::; dpnngu dpn :lis perfectly ﬁtting petri net with data dpn
if and only if for all 1in:av(sni);vi(l)is perfectly ﬁtting dpni.
proof. letdpn = (sn;v;val;init;read;write;guard )be a petri net with data with
sn= (pn;minit;mnal)andpn= (p;t;f;l ). letd=fdpn1;dpn2;:::
dpnngbe a valid decomposition of dpn withdpni= (sni;vi;vali;initi;readi;
writei;guardi),sni= (pni;mi
init;mi
nal)2usn, and pni= (pi;ti;fi;li).
()) letv2lbe such that there exists a data marking ssuch that (dpn;(minit;
init))[v(dpn;(mnal;s)). this implies that there exists a corresponding bwith
(dpn;(minit;init))[bi(dpn;(mnal;s))andl(b) =v. for all 1in, we
need to prove that there is a i
bwith(dpni;(mi
init;initi))[i
bi(dpni;(mi
nal;si))
for somesi. this follows trivially because dpnican mimic any move of dpn with
respect to transitions ti: just takei
b=ti;vi(b). note that guards can only become
weaker by projection.
(() letv2l. for all 1in, leti
bbe such that (dpni;(mi
init;initi))[i
bi
(dpni;(mi
nal;si))andli(i
b) =av(sni);vi(v). the different i
bsequences can
be stitched together into an overall bs.t.(dpn;(minit;init))[bi(dpn;(mnal;s))
withs=s1s2:::sn. this is possible because transitions in one subnet
can only inﬂuence other subnets through unique visible transitions and these can only
move synchronously as deﬁned by v. moreover, guards can only be split in indepen-
dent parts (see deﬁnition 16). suppose that tappears intiandtj, then guard (t) =
guardi(t)guardj(t). hence, a read/write in subnet icannot limit a read/write in subnet
j. therefore, we can construct bandl(b) =v. u t
4 sese-based strategy for realizing a valid decomposition
in this section we present a concrete strategy to instantiate the valid decomposition def-
inition over a petri net with data presented in the previous section (cf. def.16). the pro-
posed strategy decomposes the petri net with data in a number of single-entry single-
exit (sese) components, which have recently been shown to create meaningful frag-
ments of a process model [11,8]. sese decomposition is indicated for well-structured
models, whereas for unstructured models some automatic transformation techniques
can be considered as a pre-processing step [12].
we will now informally describe the necessary notions for understanding the pro-
posed data-oriented sese-based valid decomposition strategies described below. forn1 n2 n3 n5 n6
credit request verify
register negative 
verificationinform requester
renegotiateopen credit loan assessment register negative request register negative request
n4n4
a bcde
gf
hi
j
l km n
p os1s2
s8s3
s4s9s5
s10s7s6s1
s8 s2
s9 s10 s4 s3
s5
s6 s7a b
m n op k l
cd ij
e f gha) petri net
b) workflow graph and sesesc) rpstfig. 4: a petri net modeling the control-ﬂow of the running example, its workﬂow graph
and the rpst and sese decomposition.
n3
verify
register negative 
verificationassessment
n2
credit requestverify
renegotiaten1
credit requestregister negative 
verificationinform requesterassessment
n4n4
n5
renegotiateopen credit loan register negative request register negative request 
n6
open credit loan 
verify
register negative 
verificationopen credit loan assessment
verification decision
credit requestverify
renegotiateinterests
amountregister negative request register negative request 
register negative request register negative request 
fig. 5: sese-based decomposition for the running example, with 2-decomposition.
the sake of clarity, we will focus on the control ﬂow to illustrate the concepts, although
the deﬁnitions will be extended at the end to also consider data.
given petri net pn = (p;t;f;l ), its workﬂow graph is the structural graph
wg= (s;e)with no distinctions between places and transitions, i.e., s=p[tand
e=f. for instance, fig. 4(b) shows the workﬂow graph of the petri net of fig. 4(a)
(corresponding with the control-ﬂow part of the running example). given a subset of
edgese0eofwg, the nodesse0=fs2s:9s02s:(s;s0)2e0_(s0;s)2e0g
can be partitioned into interior and boundary. interior nodes have no connection with
nodes outside se0, while boundary nodes do. furthermore, boundary nodes can be
partitioned into entry (no incoming edge belongs to e), or exit (no outgoing edge be-
longs toe0).e0eis asese ofwg iff the subnet derived from ehas exactly two
boundary nodes: one entry and one exit. fig. 4(b) shows all non-trivial seses8of the
petri net of fig. 4(a). for a formal deﬁnition we refer to [11].
the decomposition based on seses is a well studied problem in the literature, and
can be computed in linear time. in [13,14], efﬁcient algorithms for constructing the
8note that by deﬁnition, a single edge is a sese.algorithm 1 sese-based decomposition
1: build data workﬂow graph dwg fromf,r,w
2: compute rpst fromdwg
3: compute sese decomposition dfrom the rpst
4: compute and merge subnets if necessary to preserve valid decomposition.
5:return valid decomposition where perspectives are decomposed altogether
reﬁned process structure tree (rpst) , i.e., a hierarchical structure containing all the
canonical seses of a model, were presented. informally, an rpst is a tree where the
nodes are canonical seses, such that the parent of a sese sis the smallest sese that
containss. fig. 4(c) shows the rpst of the workﬂow graph depicted in fig. 4(b). by
selecting a particular set of seses in the rpst (e.g., k-decomposition [8]), it is possible
to obtain a partitioning of the arcs. we refer the reader to the aforementioned work for
a formal description of the sese-based decomposition.
to extend the previous deﬁnitions to also account for data, one simply has to incor-
porate in the workﬂow graph the variables and read/write arcs, i.e., the data workﬂow
graph of a petri net with data (((p;t;f;l );minit;mnal);v;val;init;read;write;guard )
with data arcs r=f(v;t)jv2read(t)gandw=f(t;v)jv2write (t)gisdwg =
(s;e)withs=p[t[vande=f[r[w. the subsequent deﬁnitions after this
extension (sese, rpst) are analogous.
similar to [8], we propose a sese decomposition to analyze the conformance of
petri nets with data, but considering data workﬂow graph instead. algorithm 1 de-
scribes the steps necessary to construct a sese decomposition. the arcs are partitioned
in seses by means of creating the rpst from the data workﬂow graph, and select-
ing a particular set of seses over it. once the partitioning is done, a subnet is created
for each part. subnets contradicting some of the requirements of def. 16 (e.g. shar-
ing places, invisible or duplicate transitions, variables, or transitions with non-splitting
guards) are merged to preserve the valid decomposition deﬁnition.
figure 5 shows the decomposition for the example of fig.3, where the rpst is
partitioned using the 2-decomposition algorithm [8], i.e., seses of at most 2 arcs9.
to ensure a valid decomposition is obtained, step 4 of algorithm 1 combines multiple
sese fragments into larger fragments, which are not necessarily seses anymore.
5 implementation and experimental results
the approach discussed in this paper has been implemented as a plug-in for the open-
source prom framework for process mining.10our plug-in requires a petri net with
data and an event log as input and returns as many bags of alignments as the number
of fragments in which the petri net with data has been decomposed. each bag refers
to a different fragment and shows the alignments of each log trace and that fragment.
a second type of output is also produced in which the alignments’ information is pro-
jected onto the petri net with data. transitions are colored according to the number of
9although the seses have at most two arcs, this is not guaranteed for the ﬁnal subnets, i.e.,
some subnets are merged to preserve the valid decomposition deﬁnition.
10http://www.promtools.orgfig. 6: computation time for checking the conformance of the petri net with data in
figure 3 and event logs of different size. the y axis is on a logarithmic scale.
deviations: if no deviation occurs for a given transition, the respective box in the model
is white-colored. the ﬁlling color of a box shades towards red as a larger fraction of
deviations occur for the corresponding transition. something similar is also done for
variables: the more incorrect read/write operations occur for a variable, the more the
variable is shown with a color close to red. this output is extremely interesting from an
end-user viewpoint as it allows for gaining a helicopter view on the main causes of devi-
ations. space limitations prevent us from giving more details and showing screenshots
of the output. interested readers can refer to [15] for further information.
as previously mentioned, the plug-in has been evaluated using a number of syn-
thetic event logs and also a real-life process. the plug-in has been evaluated using the
model in figure 3 and with a number of event logs that were artiﬁcially generated.
in particular, we have generated different event logs with the same number of traces,
5000, but increasing number of events, meaning that, on average, traces were of differ-
ent length. to simulate that, for each simulated process execution, an increasing number
of renegotiations was enforced to happen. traces were also generated so as to contain
a number of deviations: the event logs were generated in a way that 25% of transitions
ﬁred violating the guards.
figure 6 shows the results of checking for conformance of the different event logs
and the process model, comparing the sese-based decomposition with k= 2 with
the case in which no decomposition is made. to check the conformance of each frag-
ment, we used the technique reported in [4]. each dot in the chart indicates a different
event log with traces of different size. the computation time refers to the conformance
checking of the whole event logs (i.e., 5000 traces). the decomposed net is the same
as in figure 5. regarding the cost function, we assign cost 1 to any deviation; however,
this could be customized based on domain knowledge. the results show that, for every
combination of event log and process model, the decomposition signiﬁcantly reduces
the computation time and the improvement is exponential in the size of the event log.
to assess the practical relevant of the approach, we also performed an evaluation
with a dutch ﬁnancial institute. the process model was provided by a process analyst
of the institute and consists of 21 transitions: 13 transitions with unique labels, 3 ac-
tivities labels shared between 2 transitions (i.e. 6 transitions in total), plus 3 invisibletransitions. the model contains twelve process variables, which are read and written
by the activities when being executed. the process model is omitted for space reasons
and shown in [15]. we were also provided with an event log that recorded the execu-
tion of 111 real instances of such a process; overall, the 111 log traces contained 3285
events, which means roughly 29.6 events per trace. we checked the conformance of
this process model and this event log, comparing the results when the model has or
has not been decomposed in small fragments. for conformance checking, here we used
the technique reported in [5] since the provided process model breaks the soundness
assumptions required by [4]. for this experiment round, the additional optimizations
proposed in [5] were deactivated to allow for a fair comparison.
the application of the decomposition approach to this real-life case study has shown
tremendous results: the conformance checking has required 52:94seconds when the
process model was decomposed using the sese-based technique presented in section 4;
conversely, it required 52891 seconds when the model was not decomposed. this indi-
cates that decomposing the process model allowed us to save 99:999% of the computa-
tion time. as a matter of fact, we tried for different values of sese parameter kbut we
obtained similar results: the computation time did not move away for more than 1 sec-
ond. the reason of this is related to the fact that every decomposition for any value of
kalways contained a certain fragment, along with others. indeed, that fragment could
not be decomposed any further than a given extent. since the computation time was
mostly due to constructing alignments with that fragment, no signiﬁcant difference in
computation time could be observed when varying k.
6 conclusions and future work
conformance checking is becoming more important for two reasons: (1) the volume
of event data available for checking normative models is rapidly growing (the topic
of “big data” is on the radar of all larger organizations) and (2) because of a variety
of regulations there is a need to check compliance. moreover, conformance checking
is also used for the evaluation of process discovery algorithms. also genetic process
mining algorithms heavily rely on the efﬁciency of conformance checking techniques.
thus far, lion’s share of conformance checking techniques has focused on control-
ﬂow and relatively small event logs. as shown in this paper, abstracting from other
perspectives may lead to misleading conformance results that are too optimistic. more-
over, as process models and event logs grow in size, divide-and-conquer approaches
are needed to still be able to check conformance and diagnose problems. perspectives
such as work distribution, resource allocation, quality of service, temporal constraints,
etc. can all be encoded as data constraints. hence, there is an urgent need to support
data-aware conformance checking in-the-large.
this paper demonstrates that data-aware decompositions can be used to speed up
conformance checking signiﬁcantly. the evaluation with a real-life case study has shown
that real data-aware process models can indeed be decomposed, thus obtaining even
tremendous saving of computation time. as future work, we would like to extend our
experimental evaluation with real-life process models of larger sizes. moreover, we
would like to explore alternative decomposition strategies using properties of the un-
derlying data, and to analyze the impact of different component sizes. this paper onlyfocuses on ﬁtness aspect of conformance, namely whether a trace can be replayed on a
process model. however, recently, research has also been carried on as regards to dif-
ferent conformance dimensions [16,17], such as whether the model is precise enough
to not allow for too much behavior compared with what observed in reality in the event
log. we plan to use data-aware decomposition approaches to speed up the assessment
of the quality of process models with respect to these other conformance dimensions,
as well.
references
1. van der aalst, w.m.p.: process mining: discovery, conformance and enhancement of busi-
ness processes. springer (2011)
2. rozinat, a., van der aalst, w.m.p.: conformance checking of processes based on monitoring
real behavior. information system 33(1) (2008) 64–95
3. adriansyah, a., van dongen, b.f., van der aalst, w.m.p.: conformance checking using cost-
based ﬁtness analysis. in: proceedings of the 15th ieee international enterprise distributed
object computing conference, (edoc 2011), ieee computer society (2011) 55–64
4. de leoni, m., van der aalst, w.m.p.: aligning event logs and process models for multi-
perspective conformance checking: an approach based on integer linear programming. in:
proceedings of the 11th international conference on business process management, (bpm
2013). v olume 8094 of lncs., springer (2013) 113–129
5. mannhardt, f., de leoni, m., reijers, h.a. van der aalst, w.m.p.: balanced multi-
perspective checking of process conformance (2014) bpm center report bpm-14-07.
6. van der aalst, w.m.p.: decomposing petri nets for process mining: a generic approach.
distributed and parallel databases 31(4) (2013) 471–507
7. van der aalst, w.m.p.: decomposing process mining problems using passages. in: proceed-
ings of the 33rd international conference on application and theory of petri (petri nets
2012). v olume 7347 of lncs., springer (2012) 72–91
8. munoz-gama, j., carmona, j., van der aalst, w.m.p.: single-entry single-exit decomposed
conformance checking. information systems 46(2014) 102–122
9. montali, m., chesani, f., mello, p., maggi, f.m.: towards data-aware constraints in declare.
in shin, s.y ., maldonado, j.c., eds.: sac, acm (2013) 1391–1396
10. jensen, k., kristensen, l.: coloured petri nets. springer verlag (2009)
11. polyvyanyy, a.: structuring process models. phd thesis, university of potsdam (2012)
12. dumas, m., garc ´ıa-ba ˜nuelos, l., polyvyanyy, a.: unraveling unstructured process models.
in mendling, j., weidlich, m., weske, m., eds.: bpmn. v olume 67 of lnbip., springer
(2010) 1–7
13. vanhatalo, j., v ¨olzer, h., koehler, j.: the reﬁned process structure tree. data knowl. eng.
68(9) (2009) 793–818
14. polyvyanyy, a., vanhatalo, j., v ¨olzer, h.: simpliﬁed computation and generalization of the
reﬁned process structure tree. in: 7th international workshop on web services and formal
methods. revised selected papers. v olume 6551 of lncs., springer (2011) 25–41
15. de leoni, m., munoz-gama, j., carmona, j., van der aalst, w.m.p.: decomposing confor-
mance checking on petri nets with data. (2014) bpm center report bpm-14-06.
16. munoz-gama, j., carmona, j.: a general framework for precision checking. international
journal of innovative computing, information and control (ijicic) 8(7b) (july 2012) 5317–
5339
17. de weerdt, j., de backer, m., vanthienen, j., baesens, b.: a multi-dimensional quality
assessment of state-of-the-art process discovery algorithms using real-life event logs. infor-
mation system 37(7) (2012) 654–676