 framework for next generation e-health systems and s ervices 
  
 twenty-first americas conference on information sys tems, puerto rico, 2015 1 a framework for next generation e-health 
systems and services 
full paper 
jorge cardoso  
cisuc, department of informatics 
engineering, university of coimbra 
jcardoso@dei.uc.pt ronny mans 
department of industrial engineering 
and innovation sciences, technische 
universiteit eindhoven 
r.s.mans@tue.nl 
paulo rupino da cunha  
cisuc, department of informatics 
engineering, university of coimbra 
rupino@dei.uc.pt  wil van der aalst  
department of computing science, 
technische universiteit eindhoven 
w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tue.nl   
henrike berthold  
sap ag 
henrike.berthold@sap.com  silvana quaglini  
department of electrical, computer 
and biomedical engineering, 
university of pavia 
silvana.quaglini@gmail.com  
 
abstract 
we propose a framework for the development of next generation e-health systems and services. it result s 
from the joint work of diverse research groups with  20 to 25 years of experience in their respective f ields 
(e.g., business process management, medical informa tics, business intelligence), and it articulates fi ve 
elements: the mining of care workflows; their compl iance with medical guidelines; their execution in a  
specialized engine capable of dealing with the inhe rent variability that exists in healthcare processe s; the 
use of business intelligence techniques; and the in tegration with communities of practice that are key  for 
the evolution of socio-technical systems. for each area, we describe its context and objectives, the s tate-
of-the-art and challenges, leading up to the propos ed innovation and its implications. the framework 
demonstrates how multidisciplinary research can ena ble a reinforcement of leadership in healthcare by 
supporting novel medical care with more predictive,  individualized, effective, and safer solutions. 
keywords 
careflows, careflow compliance, careflow management  system, process mining, healthcare intelligence. 
introduction 
rising healthcare costs have become an issue in man y countries. understanding the role and impact of 
careflows (sequences of healthcare activities) can help institutions in reducing expenditures, increas e 
efficiency and quality of patient care. we present a careflow-based framework that proposes advances f or 
the next generation of e-health systems and service s. it brings together key disciplines around five 
process-centered areas: discovery, compliance, exec ution, monitoring and analysis, and collaboration t o 
enable the development of process-aware end-to-end systems (dumas et al., 2005). 
the goal of discovery is to ascertain actual health care processes by extracting knowledge from event l ogs 
(i.e., hospital information systems, medical equipm ent, and patient information). our framework 
proposes to use careflow mining (van der aalst1, 20 09; van der aalst2, 2009) to identify, from evidenc es 
of normal operation, how care processes are de fact o performed. for instance, patients receiving medic al  framework for next generation e-health systems and s ervices 
  
 twenty-first americas conference on information sys tems, puerto rico, 2015 2 assistance leave traces of information that can be used to reconstitute the careflows that the patient s were 
subject to in a bottom-up manner, providing a more realist picture of how the organization operates th an 
a traditional top-down modeling could. once discove red, we move on to ensure that careflows meet the 
requirements of healthcare guidelines (gl), protoco ls, procedural manuals, code of practice, and laws.  
research has shown that information systems are an effective way to increase the compliance of 
treatments (kawamoto, 2005; purcell, 2005; albert, 2007). once evaluated as compliant, careflows serve  
as blueprints to manage patients’ treatments by usi ng a flexible careflow management systems (cfms), 
since traditional business process management syste ms (bpms) are too strict to deal with the inherent 
variability that exists in healthcare processes. du ring the execution of careflows, healthcare busines s 
intelligence provides methods and applications for gathering, storing, analyzing, and access to carefl ow 
data to help a better decision-making process. so f ar, little research has been directed towards analy sis 
and monitoring of processes (grigori et al, 2004, d eutch, 2008, beeri et al, 2007). horizontal to all these 
four key areas, collaboration platforms with profes sional social networks and social communities of 
practice support sharing, commenting and managing o f careflows. this type of communities is an 
important catalyst of social processes (de moor, 20 05) and is driving the evolution of socio-technical  
systems (wenger et al., 2002). 
the remainder of this paper is organized as follows . in section 2, we present the proposed framework a nd 
discuss its five core areas, guiding the reader fro m introduction to implications in each. section 3 
describes our research methodology just before our conclusion in section 4. 
a framework for next generation e-health systems and  services 
in figure 1 we illustrate how the five scientific a nd technological areas underlying the proposed 
framework for e-health systems and services come to gether. 
 
figure 1. framework for next generation e-health sy stems and services 
careflow mining (1) is concerned with new technique s and algorithms to identify the de facto care 
workflows that are in place at the hospital (van de r aalst, 2009). instead of relying on business anal ysts to  framework for next generation e-health systems and s ervices 
  
 twenty-first americas conference on information sys tems, puerto rico, 2015 3 manually identify, graphically design, and document  those processes – a costly and time consuming 
procedure – our approach automatically discovers th ese high-level workflows by reverse engineering 
them from traces that everyday operation leaves in the various hospital systems, such as calendars, la b 
equipment, and billing systems. after the discovery  process, the resulting workflows are analyzed for 
compliance (panzarasa, 2007) with clinical practice  guidelines, protocols, and best practices stated i n 
national and international laws and regulations (2) . doctors and hospital administrators can manually 
adjust the careflows to eliminate non-compliances, after which they are deployed to the careflow 
management system (cfms), a specialized business pr ocess management system (cardoso and van der 
aalst, 2009) for healthcare environments (3). this engine implements a flexible execution, called guid ing 
mode, which allows for deviations from standard pro cedure when justified. nevertheless, for quality 
assurance and adherence to regulations, a rule engi ne detects any non-compliant behavior. being the 
blueprints for all patient-related processing, care flows provide a 360º view on them, by integrating a ll 
disparate healthcare data that is usually spread ou t across various systems. business intelligence (gr igori 
et al, 2004) comes next (4), as key performance ind icators (kpis) are collected in real-time from the 
careflows. data on compliance violations, on the qu ality of lab tests, on missing information in recor ds, 
among others, enables decision-makers to take groun ded decisions about process tuning. finally, a 
collaborative platform (5) brings together healthca re professionals so that they can contribute with t heir 
knowledge. collective intelligence is leveraged usi ng professional social networks to focus on particu lar 
aspects of social processes (de moor, 2005) and sup port socio-technical systems (wenger et al., 2002).   
in the following sections, each of these key areas is analyzed in detail. for each, we introduce the c ontext 
and objectives, followed by challenges, state-of-th e-art, and proposed innovations and its implication s. 
careflow mining 
context and objectives 
typically, people involved in careflows only have a  limited or idealized view of how these processes a re 
executed. that is, they tend to have an ideal scena rio in mind, which, in reality, is only one of the many 
possible unfoldings of the workflow. on the other h and, manually designing careflows is too costly and  
time consuming. process mining is of great value in  this context, as it aims at extracting process-rel ated 
information from event logs created by existing hos pital systems that record information about careflo ws 
that have been executed. since the availability of medical personnel is typically limited and scarce, it is 
important that the obtained process insights can be  quickly communicated to the medical personnel and,  
thus, contribute to enable a better decision-making  for hospital administrators. 
this reality leads to the following two objectives.  first, since a wide variety of systems that record  careflow 
information can be found in healthcare institutions , in order to obtain useful and trustworthy event l ogs it 
is essential to develop a classification of systems  providing guidance into the identification and 
integration of different sources of data, and the i nherent problems that are related to it. second, si nce 
careflows are known to be highly variable, poorly s tructured, and cross multiple medical disciplines, it is 
necessary to develop new mining techniques which ef fectively describe the careflow under consideration , 
showing the ordering of activities, and the actors of the medical disciplines that are involved.  
state-of-the-art and challenges 
almost all mining algorithms present a discovered c areflow as a procedural/imperative model. procedura l 
languages are suitable for repetitive processes wit h tight control but fail in representing flexible p rocesses 
(chesani et al., 2009). consequently, mining result s obtained from flexible careflows are unstructured  
and hard to understand. conversely, declarative pro cess languages describe a process by means of 
constraints: any execution that does not violate co nstraints is possible, which makes them a better fi t for 
flexible careflows (van der aalst and günther, 2009 ; pesic and van der aalst, 2006). so far little res earch 
has been done on the discovery of declarative model s. current approaches heavily rely on the availabil ity 
of negative information, i.e. behavior will never o ccur or is forbidden to occur (chesani et al., 2009 ; 
ferreira and ferreira, 2006; goedertier, 2008; cata ffi et al., 2010). however, event logs do not recor d 
what cannot happen, but rather what did. additional ly, the quality of process models leaves much to be  
desired (van der aalst1, 2009, van der aalst2, 2009 ). for example, models are not tailored towards a 
specific purpose. also, they tend to show irrelevan t details and do not show that some activities or p rocess  framework for next generation e-health systems and s ervices 
  
 twenty-first americas conference on information sys tems, puerto rico, 2015 4 paths are more important than others (günther and v an der aalst, 2007, van der aalst1, 2009, van der 
aalst2, 2009). 
providing the needed classification for the heterog eneous systems in a healthcare institution and the 
guidance on how to obtain process related informati on in an effective way is far from trivial. additio nally, 
current process mining techniques have problems dea ling with the flexible nature of careflows. so, the  
challenge is to develop mining techniques that are able to capture the variability and low structure t hat 
exists within careflows. moreover, the obtained min ing results need to be communicated in a quick and 
convincing way.  
innovation and implications 
it is clear that the mining of declarative models i s still in its infancy. so, the development of new less 
procedural techniques is necessary. declarative mod els are based on constraints that mean that negativ e 
information needs to be available. advanced techniq ues need to be developed in which this negative 
information can be discovered based on historical d ata or can be inferred in another way. for the 
visualization of careflows the current situation mu st be dramatically improved, by devoting it specifi c 
attention. here, we can learn from geographical inf ormation systems and the way a car navigation 
systems present different types of information (zoo m-in/zoom-out, see traffic jams, speed limits etc.) . 
additionally, work done in the field of visual anal ytics needs to be considered. visual analytics aims  at 
presenting huge amounts of information in an unders tandable and interactive way (mansmann et al., 
2006; van ham et al., 2008; volz et al, 2013).  
 
implication 1. more predictive, individualised, eff ective and safer healthcare. 
careflow compliance 
context and objectives 
non-compliance detection may have different meaning s. first, analyzing the careflows automatically 
identified by process mining allows discovering sys tematic differences between expected and real 
processes: if any, discussion with medical and admi nistrative experts will help designing a cfms to be  
enacted within healthcare organizations, facilitati ng professionals to comply with best practices. dur ing 
the very first enactment phase, non-compliance dete ction is useful for the system validation (i.e. the  user 
can be non-compliant simply because the system prov ided a bad suggestion, due to a model error). once 
the model flaws have been fixed, and the final cfms  delivered, non-compliance must still be detected: it 
helps find human errors, lack of resources, or disa greement with the suggestions (probably due to 
patients' peculiarity). after some time, interestin gly, non-compliance could also indicate a practice is 
becoming obsolete because of new scientific evidenc e, but the careflow model has not acknowledged this  
change yet. 
the main objective in careflow compliance is to dev elop a closed loop system that allows exploiting 
quantitative measures of users’ compliance to impro ve the quality of the delivered care. more precisel y, 
the loop to close is the life cycle of guidelines a nd protocols: currently, these documents are update d only 
on the basis of new scientific evidence, but users’  feedback is also of paramount importance. thus, we  
propose the development of a technological support for detecting, analyzing and discussing non 
compliances, addressing two target users and goals:  the careflow users, that more easily will adhere t o 
best practice, and the guideline/protocol developer s, that more quickly will be alerted of any flaw in  
careflow logic. these objectives may be achieved by  classifying non-compliances according to multiple 
axes: a) their severity, that can be measured throu gh the level of scientific evidence supporting the 
recommendation, and b) their causes/motivations, ta king into account that a non compliance does not 
necessarily imply a malpractice.  
state-of-the-art and challenges 
despite the great confidence in the potential of ev idence-based medicine, compliance with guidelines 
(gls) was and continues to be poor (cabana, 1999; e ccles, 2002; leape, 2003; barner, 2003; jami,  framework for next generation e-health systems and s ervices 
  
 twenty-first americas conference on information sys tems, puerto rico, 2015 5 2007). several studies show that computerized decis ion support systems improve clinicians’ compliance 
(kawamoto, 2005; purcell, 2005; albert, 2007), part icularly if they are fully integrated with the work  
processes of clinicians (sim, 2001). moreover, it i s agreed that documenting clinical activities is of  
paramount importance, particularly when a clinician  practices outside the guidelines (pelly, 1998). 
different approaches exist for compliance checking,  from computational logic-based frameworks as 
gprove (chesani, 2008) to minimally intrusive criti quing systems, giving advice when the user’s 
decision is out of the system’s permissible range ( van bemmel, 1997; panzarasa , 2007). investigating the 
causes of non-compliance is important from the medi cal practice point of view, see gilligan (2007) 
describing an american study on the compliance with  breast cancer guidelines, and maviglia (2001) 
investigating patients’ features which affect physi cians' behavior. interesting approaches were propos ed 
by (svatek et al, 2004; razavi et al, 2007), adopti ng a data-mining method. eventually, case-based 
reasoning has been recently proposed for the automa ted support of careflow management in general 
(minor 2008, weber 06), and to careflow monitoring in particular (petridis 2009). 
careflow compliance detection and analysis involves  both technical and socio-technical challenges. fir st 
of all, it requires the formalization of “best prac tice documents” into computational models (patterns , 
rules, etc.). this first challenge requires close c ollaboration between physicians and knowledge engin eers, 
because documents are often ambiguous and include “ hidden” knowledge. second, the expected patterns 
and rules must be matched with patients' data, and this requires accessing the electronic patient reco rd. 
typically, data are stored in commercial and non-co mmercial products, requiring the interaction with 
different actors and data formats. a third challeng e is to convince cfms users to provide motivations for 
their non-compliance, even if this implies admittin g some errors.  
innovation and implications 
we propose a novel, double view of careflow complia nce based on different formalizations of guidelines  
and protocols: a graphical format (flowchart) and p roduction rules (if condition then action). the fir st 
one is used to find mismatches between the mined ca reflow and the expected process (e.g. a task presen t 
in the mined process but not in the guideline, or d ifferent sequences of tasks). here, compliance is v erified 
at a general “process” level. conversely, rules are  used to check for compliance at a more specific le vel, i.e. 
for each recommendation in a particular patient’s c are process. this allows a healthcare professional to 
reason about her/his behavior. in this context, an important issue that has not yet been systematicall y 
considered is how to present the results of non-com pliance detection according to its severity degree,  also 
based on specific healthcare settings. another inno vative aspect is the integration of multiple models . 
although there are studies about multiple gl integr ation (abidi 2009), all the existing studies on 
guideline compliance investigated only one gl at a time and do not consider the mixture of medical gls  
and administrative regulation. we propose the devel opment of methods to detect non-compliances in 
complex careflows, where this mixture is considered . finally, a further innovation will be provided by  a 
methodology able to intelligently exploit traces of  careflow executions, by retrieving similar ones, a nd by 
automatically organizing them. 
 
implication 2. accelerated developments of medical knowledge discovery and management, 
development of devices and procedures using in-sili co environments. 
careflow management system  
context and objectives 
careflows are indispensable to better understand ho w healthcare institutions operate, but one of the 
major advantages is to use them to manage patients’  treatments. once careflows emerge using a process 
mining approach, and after a thorough compliance ve rification, a flexible and compliant cfms can be 
used to guide treatments, be used for patient infor mation integration, and be used to control and 
guarantee the compliance of careflows instances wit h clinical practice gls, protocols and healthcare 
institution’s rules. the creation of a central sema ntic healthcare ontology will provide a 360º view o n 
patients. by using semantic domain models, healthca re institutions acquire several benefits, such as t he  framework for next generation e-health systems and s ervices 
  
 twenty-first americas conference on information sys tems, puerto rico, 2015 6 ability to perform inference and improve the decisi on-making procedure of healthcare professionals on 
the best treatments described by a careflow to foll ow.  
the framework proposes the practical extension and implementation of a cfms with: a) a flexible engine , 
b) a rule engine, and c) patient-based data integra tion. the flexible engine will provide a guidance m ode, 
which will enable physicians to deviate from the st rict execution of medical activities prescribed by 
careflows and, thus, undertake non-prescribed or no n-compliant actions when warranted. the rule engine  
will support the relaxed execution of careflows usi ng the guiding principle mode, encode clinical prac tice 
gls, and identify the execution of non-compliance c areflow instances.  
state-of-the-art and challenges 
current process management systems (cardoso and van  der aalst, 2009) have been developed as generic 
systems (e.g. oracle workﬂow, tibco inconcert, webs phere mq workﬂow, yawl) to be used in a 
broad spectrum of domains. as a result, a first res triction is the limited capacity to use careﬂows as  
blueprints to access data from healthcare systems u sing established protocols (e.g., hl7 and dicom), 
and integrate the data into healthcare ontologies ( e.g., snomed and open biomedical ontologies 
foundry). this integration has not been studied in the context of process-aware systems (dumas et al.,  
2005). the development of cfms with gl-based manage ment can be achieved with the use of rule base 
systems (panzarasa et al., 2007). early work on the  use of business rules and processes appeared after  the 
introduction of the rule concept (kappel et al., 19 98, knolmayer et al., 2000). so far, most work has been 
done in determining the usefulness of formal repres entational in workflow modeling, types of rules, ru le 
consistency, rule reuse, enforcement of rules, and business rule modeling limitations (zur muehlen and  
indulska, 2010, rosemann et al., 2006). 
three important challenges need to be addressed. fi rst, the cfms needs to be able to “speak” and 
“understand” xml-based communication languages (e.g ., astn, dicom, and hl7) and owl-based 
knowledge representation languages to provide a 360 º view on patients. second, providing a 360º view 
on patients requires the merging, alignment, and ex tension of current ontology developments for 
healthcare, which need to be integrated into the co re cfms engine. third, coupling a business rule eng ine 
for healthcare will enhance the cfms by enabling it  to understand and verify which clinical practice g ls 
and protocols are followed at runtime and which vio late regulations. 
innovation and implications 
the cfms proposed by our framework identifies three  innovative aspects: a) support for xml and owl-
based integration, by extending the core careflow e ngine to support an efficient and (semi-)automated 
integration of syntactic information (e.g., healthc are xml-based standards) and semantic knowledge 
(healthcare owl-based ontologies), b) direct use of  healthcare ontologies to make better routing and 
scheduling decisions, by interoperating with health care ontologies to make the system adaptive, 
intelligent, and better serve patients by providing  a 360º view on them. valuable knowledge includes 
patient care, insurance policies, drug prescription s, and clinical practices and best practices, and c ) 
support rule-based guided and flexible enactment of  careﬂows, by coupling a careflow engine with a rul e 
engine. the formalization of clinical practices and  gls will enable the careflow engine to verify if 
instances follow best practices. this support for c ompliance is important since the costs for not prov iding 
a proper care are high (perrier et al., 2008). 
 
implication 3. improved interoperability of biomedi cal information and knowledge. 
careflow bi 
context and objectives 
as careflow instances are executed by the cfms, the  generation and tracking of kpis is fundamental for  
doctors and hospital administrators to take correct ive actions. in the framework we suggest to: a) stu dy 
the functional and non-functional requirements for careflow analysis by the actors of a healthcare 
institution (e.g., physicians, nurses, and hospital  managers), b) design a data warehouse for careflow  data,  framework for next generation e-health systems and s ervices 
  
 twenty-first americas conference on information sys tems, puerto rico, 2015 7 the associated patient data, and business data, and  c) develop methods to analyze and mine data in ord er 
to evaluate careflows, detect deviations and simila rities. the careflow bi system will automatically 
produce pre-specified reports, continuously feed da shboards with kpi values and support interactive 
analysis. 
while business intelligence methods have been appli ed with great success to commercial organizations, 
their applicability to variable, low structured, mu ltidisciplinary processes, has not been studied to a great 
extent. careflows are processes with specific chara cteristics. first, there is no strict process model  for a 
careflow since each patient is an individual case. careflows are driven by the physicians’ experiences  and 
best practices. second, careflows are orthogonal to  the business processes of a healthcare institution  but 
influence the kpis as well. third, careflows as a w hole but also their single activities are associate d to 
different types of data, ranging from unstructured data such as texts or high-resolution images to 
structured data such as encoded patient information . in the framework, we propose to (1) identify 
careflow-based kpis which are used to improve decis ions of the actors in a hospital such as physicians , 
nurses, managers, and technical personal, (2) ident ify dimensions in the available metadata (such as 
patient, disease-specific and organizational inform ation) to classify careflows and allow for a combin ation 
with other measures, (3) design a representation fo r kpis over non-uniform processes, (4) develop 
methods that calculate these kpis, (5) develop  rea l-time algorithms for grouping and kpi calculation to 
enable interactive careflow analysis. 
state-of-the-art and challenges 
data warehousing (dw) and on-line analytical proces sing (olap) have been used for the integration 
and consolidation of multi-dimensional data analysi s to provide fast and timely data analyses. in 
dw/olap architectures (inmon, 2005; kimball et al, 2008), data are pulled from data sources and 
prepared for the dw through an etl (extraction, tra nsformation, loading) process. ongoing research is 
directed towards living or real-time data warehouse s (birte, 2008), where changes in the source data 
are quickly propagated to the data warehouse, which  thus contains current data. data warehousing and 
olap has been traditionally applied to business dat a, which has led to the term business intelligence.   in 
principle olap can be applied to all quantitative m easures that can be classified into dimensions with  
different levels of granularity. little research ha s been directed towards analysis and monitoring of 
processes (grigori et al, 2004, deutch, 2008, beeri  et al, 2007). deutch (2008) has developed models f or 
traces of web-based applications and a query langua ge that allows querying the structure of the traces . 
grigori et al. (2004) have developed methods and a tool for analysis and mining of business processes 
with known process models. beeri et al, (2007) have  designed a query language for monitoring business 
processes. all approaches base the analysis on know n processes, which are modeled either in process 
modeling language like bpel or directly in a web-ba sed application.  
we identify three major challenges. firstly, meanin gful similarity measures need to be developed for t he 
grouping of ad-hoc careflows along different dimens ions such as process and patient characteristics. 
secondly, analysis methods and representations for the analysis’ results for groups of heterogeneous 
careflows are needed. finally, the analysis algorit hms have to be fast enough to support interactive d ata 
analysis and should therefore use a fast main-memor y data management system. 
innovation and implications 
the careflow bi component proposed by in framework goes beyond the state of the art in three aspects: 
first, it allows analyzing less-structured careflow  processes together with business and patient’s dat a. a 
careflow-driven analysis groups careflows that are similar according to some careflow-specific 
characteristics and enables their comparison. secon d, the kpi representation has to reflect the 
heterogeneity of the group of careflow processes it  has been calculated for. finally, since the user c ould 
specify a new classification of the set of heteroge neous processes on analysis time, the careflow bi 
component has to support online classification and analysis. 
 
implication 4. increased acceptance and use of real istic and validated models that allow researchers 
from different disciplines to exploit, share resour ces and develop new knowledge.  framework for next generation e-health systems and s ervices 
  
 twenty-first americas conference on information sys tems, puerto rico, 2015 8 careflow collaborative platform  
context and objectives 
the four previous scientific and technological adva ncements create a wealth of healthcare information 
and knowledge. mined careflows, worldwide best prac tices, treatment guidelines, and kpi indicators 
which are indispensable for decision-making need to  be shared across healthcare departments. 
introducing social networking capabilities into hea lthcare institutions changes the way information ca n 
be discovered, consumed, and delivered by caregiver s. for example, doctors, nurses and administrators 
can create social networks of peers or join social networks of other healthcare professionals to share  
experience about adopted careflows, current perform ance indicators, and discuss the 360º data view of 
patients. therefore, the framework provides a caref low collaborative platform, whose design exploits 
ideas and concepts emerging from social networks an d social environments to create synergies that are 
yet to be described and quantified. 
a careflow collaborative platform, which enables co llaboration among all the organizational units, wit hin 
a single healthcare institution or across instituti ons that are cooperating in the care delivery proce ss of a 
same patient needs to be available. on the other ha nd, there is the need to create so-called “social 
communities of practice” for specific medical areas . for example, the platform can allow doctors to 
explain their decisions when they are not compliant  with gls. the systematic collection of these 
explanations is a means to continuously improve gls  implementation and versioning. similarly, the 
community for a given specialty can view, comment, share, analyze compliance, and propose changes to 
recently mined careflows. nurses can review the lat est recommendations for treatments and be up-to-dat e 
on the most appropriate way to assist patients. hos pital administrators can be kept appraised of the 
effectiveness and efficiency of the careflows by me ans of personalized dashboards built from selected 
kpis, and, in turn, provide additional change sugge stions for improved performance. 
state-of-the-art and challenges 
the success of social networks is fostering researc hers to exploit the same technologies for supportin g 
communities of practice. this type of communities i s an important catalyst of research, economic and 
social processes (de moor, 2005) and is in fact dri ving the evolution of socio-technical systems (weng er et 
al., 2002). in healthcare, these communities bring together medical experts, practitioners, patients a nd 
their families. the related work in this area is ra ther scarce. nordqvist (2009) discusses how web sit es 
can help chronic patients with the daily management  of their disease. arenella (2010) uses medscape, a  
commonly used online medical education provider, to  disseminate palliative care education to health 
professionals. networks of integrated care and rese arch, that combine patients and expertise by sharin g 
databases and disease registries on the web, are be ing developed with the aim of harmonization of 
procedures, international epidemiological surveilla nce, and pharmaco-vigilance (nurok, 2010).  
the careflow collaborative platform must be able to  conjugate careflows for case management with wider  
applications for social networking and social commu nities. collaborative applications have traditional ly 
faced resistance from healthcare professionals. inc onsistent user interfaces, unclear interaction patt erns, 
and unintuitive designs are the major underlying ca uses. therefore, there is the need to carefully con sider 
the daily activities, computer literacy, interactio n patterns with systems, and sociometrics of health care 
professionals. to quantify and study professionals’  relationships to develop a sound social network-ba sed 
collaborative platform needs to combine social theo ry and technology.  
innovation and implications 
an important innovation aspect concerns the involve ment of all healthcare professionals that are joine d in 
the collaborative platform. they are coordinated wi thin a “community of practice” represented using 
medical social networks. this is a new approach sin ce no social community of practice exists for the 
sharing of careflows and dealing with their improve ment through formal methods. up until now, most of 
these communities work in an “open-loop” modality, i.e. people can find suggestions, recommended 
paths, and so on, but there is no support for final  users to be an active part in the improvement proc ess 
model. the proposed framework aims at closing the l oop, in such a way that caregivers and healthcare 
professionals’ feedback becomes the starting point for such improvements. members of communities  framework for next generation e-health systems and s ervices 
  
 twenty-first americas conference on information sys tems, puerto rico, 2015 9 need to share common-ground knowledge in order to d iscuss careflows based on common terminologies 
and concepts. therefore, the platform and its tools  rely on an ontology with a formal definition for 
concepts. 
 
implication 5. reinforced leadership of industry an d strengthened multidisciplinary research excellenc e 
in supporting innovative medical care. 
research methodology 
since the proposed framework for next generation e- health systems and services is intended to guide th e 
creation of artefacts to serve human purposes, it i s amenable to be researched using a design science 
approach, as discussed by (march and smith, 1995). in this case, the concrete goal to improve careflow s 
drives all building and evaluation efforts of the a rtefacts, namely with utility in mind. 
march and smith (1995) identify and describe four r esearch outputs (artefacts in the form of construct s or 
concepts, models, methods, and instantiations) and four research activities (build, evaluate, theorize , and 
justify).  
the authors state that the outputs can be “instanti ated in specific products, physical implementations  
intended to perform certain tasks” that operational ize constructs, models, and methods to demonstrate 
their feasibility and effectiveness. they add that these instantiations may precede the complete 
articulation of the underlying artefacts. 
regarding the research activities, build  is concerned with constructing the artefact, takin g into account its 
value or utility to a community of users. the key q uestion in this activity is “does the artefact work ?”. after 
that, evaluate is concerned with “how well does it work?”. theorize follows to “explicate the 
characteristics of the artefact and its interaction  with the environment that result from the observed  
performance”. in a nutshell, theorizing clarifies w hy and how the artefact works. finally, justify  is 
concerned with gathering evidence to test the theor y – justifying the explanation.” 
the researchers involved in the development of the proposed framework come from different areas, and 
include a team that establishes bridges to healthca re institutions where it can be deployed and tested . so 
far, the research activities have been centred on b ase artefacts. we developed concepts (such as caref low 
mining, careflow compliance, careflow management, a nd careflow bi), and started to experiment with 
methods to achieve the goals for each area. a first  iteration of evaluation, theorization, and justifi cation 
lead us to a model – the proposed framework – that will guide the evolution and integration of the bas e 
artefacts into an instantiation of a software platf orm in a healthcare institution. 
conclusion 
recent developments and programming paradigms have demonstrated the advantages of using process-
driven systems (e.g., amazon swf), service-orientat ion (e.g., web api and cloud services), and data 
analysis (e.g., using map-reduce) to build modern i nformation systems. while these developments found 
a quick acceptance by competitive businesses – whic h have embraced them – they can also bring 
substantial benefits for the next generation of e-h ealth systems. nonetheless, this requires identifyi ng e-
health areas they can be applied more effectively. 
we have described a framework centered on the conce pt of care workflows that brings together five key 
areas required for the development of next generati on of e-health systems and services: careflow minin g, 
to elicit actual enacted processes; careflow compli ance, to ensure their alignment with clinical guide lines, 
and protocols; careflow management, to execute them  in a guiding mode; careflow bi, to collect and 
process kpis; and careflow collaboration. 
the main limitation of the proposed framework is th at it finds a better applicability in healthcare 
environments that already use process-aware is or t hat have already adopted business process 
management initiatives.  framework for next generation e-health systems and s ervices 
  
 twenty-first americas conference on information sys tems, puerto rico, 2015 10  acknowledgements 
this work has been partially funded by the icis pro ject centro-07-0224-feder-002003. 
references 
arenella c., yox s., eckstein d. s., and ousley a. 2010. “expanding the reach of a cancer palliative c are 
curriculum through web-based dissemination: a publi c-private collaboration,” journal of cancer 
education (25:3), pp.418-421. 
beeri, c., eyal, a., milo, t., and pilberg, a. 2007 . “monitoring business processes with queries,” in 
proceedings of vldb , veinna, austria, pp.603-614.  
birte. 2008. business intelligence for the real tim e enterprise, a workshop a collocated with vldb, 
auckland, new zealand. 
cardoso, j. and van der aalst, w.m.p. 2009. handbook of research on business process modeling , 
hershey, pa: information science reference -imprint  of igi publishing. 
cardoso, j., jablonski, s. and volz, b. 2013. “a na vigation metaphor to support mobile workflow 
systems,” in proceedings of bpm 2013 workshops , pp. 537-548. 
cattafi, m., lamma, e., riguzzi, f., and storari, s . 2010. “incremental declarative process mining,” smart 
information and knowledge management, studies in co mputational intelligence  (260), pp. 103-
128. 
chesani, f., lamma, e., mello, p., montali, m., rig uzzi, f. and storari, s. 2009. “exploiting inductiv e 
logic programming techniques for declarative proces s mining,” transactions on petri nets and 
other models of concurrency, lecture notes in compu ter science  (5460), pp. 278-295. 
chesani, f., lamma, e., mello, p., montali, m., sto rari, s. baldazzi, p. and manfredi, m. 2008. 
“compliance checking of cancer-screening careflows:  an approach based on computational logic,” 
studies in health technology and informatics  (139), pp.183-192. 
de moor, a. 2005. “ontology-guided meaning negotiat ion in communities of practice,” in proceedings of 
the workshop on the design for large-scale digital communities at the 2nd international 
conference on communities and technologies (c&t 200 5) , p. mambrey and w. grther (eds.), milan, 
italy. 
de roure, d., goble, c., and stevens, r. 2009. “the  design and realisation of the myexperiment virtual  
research environment for social sharing of workflow s,” future generation computer systems  (25), 
pp. 561-567. 
deutch, d. 2008. “querying web-based applications u nder models of uncertainty,” in proceedings of 
pvldb, auckland, new zealand, pp. 1659-1665. 
dumas, m., aalst, w.m.p., and ter hofstede, a. 2005 . process-aware information systems: bridging 
people and software through process technology , hoboken, nj: wiley-interscience. 
goedertier, s. 2008. declarative techniques for modeling and mining busi ness processes , phd thesis, 
katholieke universiteit leuven, faculteit economie en bedrijfswetenschappen. 
grigori, d., casati, f., castellanos, m., dayal, u. , sayal, m., and shan, m. 2004. “business process 
intelligence,” computers in industry (53:3), pp. 321-343. 
günther c.w. and van der aalst, w.m.p. 2007. “fuzzy  mining – adaptive process simplification based on 
multi-perspective metrics,” business process management, lecture notes in compu ter science 
(4714), pp. 328-343. 
inmon, w. h. 2005. building the data warehouse , indianapolis: ni: wiley publishing. 
kappel, g., rausch-schott, s., and retschitzegger, w. 1998. “coordination in workflow management 
systems - a rule-based approach,” in proceedings of coordination technology for collabor ative 
applications - organizations, processes, and agents  [asian 1996 workshop] , springer-verlag, 
london, uk, pp. 99–120.  
kimball, r., ross, m., thornthwaite, w., and mundy,  j. 2008. the data warehouse lifecycle toolkit , 
indianapolis: ni: wiley publishing. 
knolmayer, g., endl, r., and pfahrer, m. 2000. “mod eling processes and workﬂows by business rules,” 
business process management, lecture notes in compu ter science (1806), pp. 16–29.  
lu, r., and sadiq, s. 2007. “a survey of comparativ e business process modeling approaches,” business 
information systems, lecture notes in computer scie nce (4439), pp. 82-94.  framework for next generation e-health systems and s ervices 
  
 twenty-first americas conference on information sys tems, puerto rico, 2015 11 march, s. t. and smith, g. f. 1995. “design and nat ural science research on information technology,” 
decision support systems (15:4), pp.251-266.  
nordqvist c., hanberger l., timpka t., and nordfeld t s. 2009. “health professionals' attitudes towards  
using a web 2.0 portal for child and adolescent dia betes care: qualitative study,” journal of medical 
internet research  (11:2), e12. 
nurok m., eslick i., carvalho c. r., costabel u., d 'armiento j., glanville a. r., harari s., henske e.  p., 
inoue y., johnson s. r., lacronique j., lazor r., m oss j., ruoss s. j., ryu j. h., seyama k., watz h.,  
xu k. f., hohmann e.l., and moss f. 2010. “the inte rnational lam registry: a component of an 
innovative web-based clinician, researcher, and pat ient-driven rare disease research platform,” 
lymphatic research and biology  (8:1), pp. 81-87. 
panzarasa, s., quaglini, s., cavallini, a., marches elli, s., stefanelli, m., and micieli, g. 2007. 
“computerised guidelines implementation: obtaining feedback for revision of guidelines, clinical data 
model and data ﬂow,” artificial intelligence in medicine, lecture notes in computer science  (4594), 
pp. 461–466.  
perrier, l., cautela, n., morelle, m., and havet, n . 2008. “short-term cost impact of compliance with 
clinical practice guidelines for initial sarcoma tr eatment,” tech. rep., hal open archive server: 
http://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-00322614/ en/ 
pesic m. and van der aalst, w.m.p. 2006. “a declara tive approach for flexible business process 
management,” bpm workshops 2006, lecture notes in computer scien ce  (4103), pp. 169-180. 
van der aalst, w.m.p. 2009. “tomtom for business pr ocess management (tomtom4bpm),” advanced 
information systems engineering, lecture notes in c omputer science (5565), pp. 2-5. 
van der aalst, w.m.p. 2009. “using process mining t o generate accurate and interactive business 
process maps,” business information systems workshops, lecture not es in business information 
processing  (37), pp. 1-14. 
van der aalst, w.m.p. and günther, c.w. 2007. “find ing structure in unstructured processes: the case 
for process mining – invited paper,” in proceedings of the seventh international conference  on 
application of concurrency to system design , pp. 3-12. 
wenger, e., mcdermott, r. and snyder, w. 2002. cultivating communities of practice , cambridge, ma: 
harvard business school press. 
zur muehlen, m., and indulska, m. 2010. “modeling l anguages for business processes and business rules:  
a representational analysis,” information systems (35:4), pp. 379-390. 
 