 1
wil van der aalst
process mining
data science in action, second edition
process 
miningwil van der aalst
computer scienceprocess mining
data science in action
second edition/t_h  is is the second edition of wil van der aalst’s seminal book on process mining, 
which now discusses the /f_i  eld also in the broader context of data science and big data approaches. it includes several additions and updates, e.g. on inductive mining tech-niques, the notion of alignments, a considerably expanded section on so/f_t  ware tools and a completely new chapter on process mining in the large. it is self-contained, while at the same time covering the entire process-mining spectrum from process discovery to predictive analytics.
a/f_t  er a general introduction to data science and process mining in part i, part ii pro-
vides the basics of business process modeling and data mining necessary to understand the remainder of the book. next, part iii focuses on process discovery as the most important process mining task, while part iv moves beyond discovering the control /f_l  ow of processes, highlighting conformance checking, and organizational and time perspectives. part v oﬀ  ers a guide to successfully applying process mining in practice, including an introduction to the widely used open-source tool prom and several com-mercial products. lastly, part vi takes a step back, re/f_l  ecting on the material presented and the key open challenges.
overall, this book provides a comprehensive overview of the state of the art in process 
mining. it is intended for business process analysts, business consultants, process man-agers, graduate students, and bpm researchers.
features and beneﬁ  ts:
 •first book on process mining, bridging the gap between business process modeling and business intelligence and positioning process mining within the rapidly growing data science discipline
 •/t_h  is second edition includes over /one.oldstyle/five.oldstyle/zero.oldstyle pages of new material, e.g. on data quality, the relation to data science, inductive mining techniques and the notion of alignments
 •written by one of the most in/f_l  uential and most-cited computer scientists and the best-known bpm researcher
 •self-contained and comprehensive overview for a broad audience in academia and industry, including up-to-date information on tools and the exploitation of modern it infrastructures
9783662498507isbn 978-3-662-49850-7van der aalst
2nd ed.