process mining: spreadsheet -like technology for 
processes  
wil van der aalst  
 eindhoven university of technology, p.o. box 513,  5600 mb, eindhoven, the netherlands, 
w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tue.nl  
abstract  
spreadsheets can be viewed as a success story. since the late seventies spreadsheet programs have 
been installed on the majority of computers and play a role comparable to text editors and 
databases management systems . spreadsh eets can be u sed to do anything with numbers , but are 
unable to handle process models  and event data . event logs and operational processes can be 
found everywhere . recent breakthroughs in process mining resulted in novel techniques to 
discover the real pro cesses, to detect deviations from normative process models, and to analyze 
bottlenecks and waste. comparable to spreadsheet programs like excel  which are  widely used in 
finance, production, sales, education, sports, process mining software can be used in a  broad range 
of organizations. where as spreadsheets work with numbers, process mining starts from event data 
with the aim to analyze processes. this keynote paper  uses spreadsheets as an analogy  to make 
the case for  process mining as an essential tool for data sci entists and business analysts .  
1 spreadsheets: handling numbers  
a spreadsheet is composed of cells organized in rows and columns. some cells serve as input, 
other cells have values computed over a collection of other cells (e.g., taking the sum over an 
array of cells).  
richard mattessich pioneered computerized spreads heets in the early 1960 -ties. mattessich 
realized that doing repeated "what -if" analyses by hand is not productive. he described the basic 
principles (computations on cells in a matrix) of today's spreadsheets in (mattessich, 1964) and 
provided some initia l fortran iv code written by his assistants tom schneider and paul zitlau. 
the ideas were not widely adopted because few organizations owned computers.  
the first widely used spreadsheet program was visicalc  ("visible calculator") developed by dan 
bricklin  and bob frankston, founders of software arts (later named visicorp). visicalc was 
released in 1979 for the apple ii computer. it is generally considered as apple ii's "killer 
application", because numerous organizations purchased the apple ii computer jus t to be able to 
use visicalc . in the years that followed the software was ported to other platforms including the 2 wil van der aalst  
 
apple iii, ibm pc, commodore pet, and atari. in the same period supercalc  (1980) and 
multiplan  (1982) were released following the success of visicalc .  
lotus development corporation was founded in 1982 by mitch kapor and jonathan sachs. they 
developed lotus 1 -2-3, named after the three ways the product could be used: as a spreadsheet, as 
a graphics package, and as a database manager. when lotus 1-2-3 was launched in 1983, visicalc  
sales dropped dramatically. lotus 1 -2-3 took full advantage of ibm pc's capabilities and better 
supported data handling and charting. what visicalc  was for apple ii, lotus 1 -2-3 was for ibm 
pc. for the second time, a sp readsheet program generated a tremendous growth in computer sales 
(rakovic et al., 2014). lotus 1 -2-3 dominated the spreadsheet market until 1992. the dominance 
ended with the uptake of microsoft windows.  
microsoft's excel  was released in 1985. microsoft originally sold the spreadsheet program 
multiplan , but replaced it by excel  in an attempt to compete with lotus 1 -2-3. the software was 
first released for the macintosh computer in 1985. microsoft released excel 2.0  in 1987 which 
included a run -time versio n of ms windows. five years later, excel  was market leader and 
became immensely popular as an integral part of the microsoft's office  suite. borland's quattro  
which was released in 1988 competed together with lotus 1 -2-3 against excel , but could not 
sustai n a reasonable market share. excel  has dominated the spreadsheet market over the last 25 
years. in 2015, the 16th release of excel  became available.  
online cloud -based spreadsheets such as google sheets  (part of google docs  since 2006) provide 
spreadsheet  functionality in a web browser. numbers  is a spreadsheet application developed by 
apple available on iphones, ipads (ios), and macs (os x). dozens of other spreadsheet apps are 
available via google play or apple's app store.  
 
figure 1: reality is reduced to numbers in a spreadsheet : concepts such as cases, events, activities, 
resources, etc. are missing and process models are not supported.  
spreadsheets can be used to do anything with numbers.  of course one needs to write dedic ated 
programs if computations get complex or use database technology if data sets get large. however, 
for the purpose of this keynote paper  we assume that spreadsheets adequately deal with numerical 
data. we would like to argue that process mining software  enables users to do anything with 
events . in this paper, we introduce process mining against the backdrop of spreadsheets.  
2 process mining: handling events  
instead of numbers process mining starts from  events , i.e., things that have happened and could 
be recorded. events may take place inside a machine (e.g., an atm or baggage handling system), mkwi  2016  – keynote  3 
 
inside an enterprise information system (e.g., a purchase decision or salary payment), inside a 
hospital (e.g., makin g an x -ray), inside a social network (e.g., sending a twitter message), inside a 
transportation system (e.g., checking in at an airport), etc. events may be "life events", "machine 
events", or "organization events". the term internet of events  (ioe), coine d in (van der aalst, 
2014), refers to all event data available. the ioe is roughly composed of the internet of content 
(ioc), the internet of people (iop), internet of things (iot), and internet of locations (iol). 
these are overlapping, e.g., a tweet sent  by a mobile phone from a particular location is in the 
intersection of iop and iol. process mining aims to exploit event data in a meaningful way , for 
example, to provide insights, identify bottlenecks, anticipate problems, record policy violations, 
recom mend countermeasures, and streamline processes (van der aalst, 2011).  
explore event data
discover the real processes
 
figure 2: process mining can be used to discover the real processes, detect deviations, predict delays 
and risks, and diagnose  bottlenecks and waste.  concep ts such as cases, events, activities, resources, 
etc. are natively supported and process models showing bottlenecks, risks, costs, etc. can be shown.  
process mining should be in the toolbox of data scientists, business analysts, and others that need 
to ana lyze event data. unfortunately, process mining is not yet a widely adopted technology. 
surprisingly, the process perspective is absent in the majority of big data initiatives and data 
science curricula. we argue that event data should be used to improve end-to-end processes: it is 
not sufficient to consider "numbers" and isolated activities. data science approaches tend to be 
process agonistic whereas process management approaches tend to be model -driven without 
considering the "evidence" hidden in the da ta. process mining can be seen as a means to bridge 
the gap between data science  and process management . by positioning  process mining as a 
spreadsheet -like technology for event data, we hope to increase awareness in the 
wirtschaftsinformatik (wi) / busine ss & information systems engineering (bise) community.   4 wil van der aalst  
 
3 outlook  
just like spreadsheet software, process mining aims to provide a generic approach not restricted to 
a particular application domain. whereas spreadsheets focus on numbers , process mining focus es 
on events . there have been some attempts to extend spreadsheets with process mining 
capabilities. for example, qpr's processanalyzer  can be deployed as an excel  add-in. however, 
processes and events are very different from bar/pie charts and numbers. pr ocess models and 
concepts such as cases, events, activities, timestamps, and resources need to be treated as first -
class citizens during analysis. data mining tools and spreadsheet programs take as input any 
tabular data without distinguishing between thes e key concepts. as a result, such tools tend to be 
process -agnostic .  
process management 
 data science process mining
data mining
machine learning
visual analyticsstatisticsnosql
mapreduce
ethicspredictive analytics
business process managementworkflow management
operations research
business process reengineering
scientific managementconcurrency theoryverificationsimulationclusteringprocess discovery
conformance checking
...
 
figure 3: p rocess m ining as the missing link between process management (bpm, wfm, bpr, etc.) 
and data science (data mining, statistics, etc.).  
in this paper , we promoted process mining as a generic technology on the interface between data 
science and process management. we hope that process mining will become the "tail wagging the 
dog" (with the dog being big data initiatives) and play a role comparable to sp readsheets. this 
may seem unrealistic, but there is a clear need to bridge the gap between data science and process 
management. process mining provides the techniques connecting both worlds.  
references  
van der aalst, w. (2011). process mining: discovery, conformance and enhancement of 
business processes. springer -verlag, berlin.  
van der aalst, w. (2014). data scientist: the engineer of the future. in mertins, k., benaben, f., 
poler, r., and bourrieres, j., editors, proceedings of the i -esa conference, vol ume 7 of 
enterprise interoperability, pages 13 -28. springer -verlag, berlin.  
van de r aalst, w. (2015 ). spreadsheets for business process management: how to deal with 
"events" rather than "numbers" ? (report,  18 pages,  available upon request) .  
ceruzzi , p. (2003). a history of modern computing. mit press.  
jelen, b. (2005). the spreadsheet at 25: 25 amazing excel examples that evolved from the 
invention that changed the world.  
mattessich, r. (1964). simulation of the firm through a budget computer prog ram. homewood, 
r.d. irwin.  
rakovic, l., sakal, m., and pavlicevic, v. (2014). spreadsheets - how it started. international 
scientific journal of management information systems, 9(4):9 -14.  