international  journal  of  information  management  36  (2016)  126–141
contents  lists  available  at  sciencedirect
international  journal  of  information  management
journal  h  om  epa  ge  :  www.elsevier.com/l  ocate/ijinfomgt
the  effectiveness of workﬂow  management  systems:  a  longitudinal
study
h.a.  reijersa,b,∗,  i.  vanderfeestenb,  w.m.p.  van  der  aalstb
avrije  universiteit  amsterdam,  the  netherlands
beindhoven  university  of  technology,  the  netherlands
a r t i c l  e  i  n  f  o
article history:
received
 9  december  2014
received
 in  revised  form  11  august  2015
accepted
 20  august  2015
available
 online  14  november  2015
keywords:workﬂow management
it
 effectiveness
simulationbusiness process  performance
automationa b s t r  a  c  t
workﬂow management systems coordinate and  allocate  work  through  the  various  stages  of  executing
business processes.  the  beneﬁts  of  such  systems  appear  pervasive,  but  no  hard  data  is  available  that
conﬁrms that their  implementation  improves  organizational  performance.  in  part,  this  is  due  to  the
difﬁculty of  measuring  the  effects  of  enterprise-wide  initiatives  in  general.  in  this  paper,  the  results  are
presented of a longitudinal,  multi-case  study  into  the  effectiveness  of  workﬂow  management  technology.
the study  builds  on  a  novel  methodology  that  combines  ﬁeld  work  and  computer  simulations.  through
its application, the  contribution  of  this  technology  to  conduct  business  processes  faster  and  with  less
effort could  be  quantitatively  assessed.  surprisingly,  only  a  fraction  of  the  projects  that  were  followed
in this longitudinal study  led  to  a  fully  operational  implementation  of  a  workﬂow  management  system
at all.  even  so,  in  most  of  the  projects  where  such  a  system  was  introduced  this  resulted  in  substantial
improvements. we  present  success  and  fail  factors  for  the  implementation  of  this  technology  within
organizations, which  we  inferred  from  a  follow-up  analysis.  the  novel  methodology  presented  in  this
paper is  thought  to  be  of  value  to  track  the  performance  effects  of  introducing  other  technologies  or
organization concepts  as  well.
© 2015 elsevier ltd. all  rights  reserved.
1.  introduction
a  workﬂow  management  system  (wfms)  is  an  enterprise
information  system  that  ensures  that  work  can  be  automatically
allocated  by  a  computer  system  to  resources  –  humans  and  appli-
cations  –  in  accordance  with  a  predeﬁned  schema  of  the  process,
the  available  resources,  and  their  dependencies,  see  e.g.,  (jablonski
&  bussler,  1996 ).  over  the  years,  it  has  become  fashionable  to  refer
to  systems  that  work  in  this  way  as  process-aware  information  sys-
tems  or  business  process  management  suites .  however,  there  is  little
dispute  from  a  technical  viewpoint  that  they  share  the  essential
characteristics  of  process  coordination  with  a  wfms  (reijers  &
heusinkveld,  2004 ).
while  commercial  wfmss  have  been  around  since  the  mid-
1980s  (zur  muehlen,  2004 ),  the  industrial  appetite  for  this
technology  is  still  on  the  rise.  one  analyst  ﬁrm  predicts  that  the
market  for  this  technology,  which  is  at  $2.6  billion  in  2012,  will
reach  $7  billion  by  2018  (wintergreen,  2012 ).  in  academic  circles,
∗corresponding author  at:  vrije  universiteit  amsterdam,  department  of  com-
puter
 science,  de  boelelaan  1081,  1081  hv,  amsterdam,  the  netherlands.
e-mail address:  h.a.reijers@vu.nl  (h.a.  reijers).too,  the  technology  receives  wide  attention,  as  evidenced  by  the
profusion  of  handbooks,  text  books,  and  conference  proceedings
on  this  technology  and  its  associated  topics  (dumas,  van  der  aalst,
&  ter  hofstede,  2005 ;  van  der  aalst  &  van  hee,  2004 ;  van  der  aalst,
2011 ;  von  brocke  &  rosemann,  2010 ;  weske,  2007 ).
despite  the  interest  in  workﬂow  management  technology  as
both  a  practical  tool  and  an  object  of  academic  study,  rigorous  evi-
dence  for  the  beneﬁts  that  a  wfms  provides  to  an  organization  is
lacking.  previous  studies  into  this  topic  have  been  few  and  each  of
these  can  be  challenged  with  respect  to  their  methodological  set-
up.  it  is,  however,  crucial  to  determine  whether  solid  advantages
can  be  attributed  to  using  a  wfms.  this  would  both  justify  and
inform  the  use  of  and  development  of  this  technology.
with  this  paper,  we  aim  to  contribute  to  a  proper  assessment
of  the  effectiveness  of  workﬂow  technology.  in  effect,  we  carried
out  a  multi-case  study  that  involved  the  implementation  of  wfmss
across  10  dutch  organizations  in  the  period  of  2001–2012.  overall,
25  business  processes  were  targeted  to  be  supported  by  a  wfms  in
these  organizations.  we  set  out  to  measure  how  the  performance  of
each  of  these  processes  was  affected  by  this  technology.  this  paper
presents  the  results  from  this  study.  as  such,  it  follows  up  on  our
earlier  publication,  which  explained  the  methodological  set-up  of
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2015.08.003
0268-4012/© 2015  elsevier  ltd.  all  rights  reserved.h.a.  reijers  et  al.  /  international  journal  of  information  management  36  (2016)  126–141  127
our  study  and  included  our  preliminary  results  (reijers  &  van  der
aalst,  2005 ).
the  paper  will  also  be  of  interest  to  a  wider  audience  of
researchers,  speciﬁcally  those  who  are  interested  in  determining
the  effects  of  enterprise-wide  initiatives.  a  key  difﬁculty  in  such  an
assessment  is  to  isolate  the  effects  of  a  new  organizational  con-
cept  or  technology  from  other  developments  that  inﬂuence  the
performance  metrics  of  interest.  the  method  that  is  presented  in
this  paper,  which  combines  data-gathering  through  ﬁeld  work  on
the  one  hand  and  computer  simulations  on  the  other,  has  been
developed  to  surmount  this  issue.
the  structure  of  this  paper  is  as  follows.  in  section  2,  we  will
provide  the  state  of  the  art  with  respect  to  evaluation  studies  of
workﬂow  management  technology.  in  section  3,  we  will  provide
the  research  design,  which  is  followed  by  the  presentation  of  our
ﬁndings  in  section  4.  section  5  provides  a  discussion  of  the  results;
section  6  concludes  this  paper  with  a  summary  and  recommenda-
tions.
2.  related  work
to ground our work,  we  conducted  a  thorough  literature  review
on the  impact  of  wfmss  in  organizations.  an  extensive  discussion
of this related work,  which  covers  both  the  methodological  back-
ground of  this  review  as  well  as  more  details  on  its  outcomes,  is
available in (vanderfeesten  &  reijers,  2014 ).  below  we  will  only
give  a  summary  of  our  ﬁndings  and  position  the  research  described
in this paper  related  to  the  existing  literature  found.  we  mainly
aimed  at  the  investigation  of  operational  performance  tied  to  the
use  of  wfmss,  but  also  came  across  other  types  of  impact  on  an
organization.
the  literature  review  revealed  a  number  of  early  papers  that
report  on  successful  implementations  of  wfmss,  which  did  not,
however,  quantify  the  obtained  results,  e.g.,  (bowers,  button,  &
sharrock,  1995 ;  dourish,  2001 ;  prinz  &  kolvenbach,  1996 ;  schael
&  zeller,  1993 ;  schmidt,  meetz,  &  wendler,  1999 ).  these  studies
mainly  illustrate  the  improvement  in  operational  performance  and
completeness  of  information  that  the  implementation  of  a  wfms  may
bring  to  the  company,  if  beneﬁts  were  reported  at  all.
later, a  number  of  papers  appeared  reporting  on  the  measured
operational  performance  after  the  implementation  of  a  wfms  in
one  organization.  most  of  these  studies  report  on  reduction  of  lead
time .  in  goebl,  messner,  schwarzer,  and  ag  (2001)  for  instance,  a
70%  reduction  of  the  overall  lead  time  was  achieved  by  the  wfms,
mainly  by  introducing  electronic  data  and  automating  the  rout-
ing  of  tasks.  küng  and  hagen  (2007)  also  report  on  a  reduction
of  lead  time ,  and  additionally  mention  an  increase  in  output  per
employee  and  an  increase  in  quality  of  work  for  several  processes  in
a  swiss  bank.  also,  (brahe  &  schmidt,  2007 )  describe  the  effects
of  the  implementation  of  a  wfms  (together  with  business  pro-
cess  re-engineering  in  a  large  ﬁnancial  institution):  the  number  of
cases  handled  per  day  increased  dramatically  and  the  workers  were
about  19%  faster  doing  their  job  with  the  new  wfms.
more  recently,  workﬂow  management  technology  also  started
to  receive  attention  in  the  healthcare  domain.  halsted  and  froehle
(2008)  report  the  results  of  the  implementation  of  a  wfms  (com-
plemented  with  a  ‘ﬁlmless’  document  management  system  and
speech  recognition)  in  a  radiology  department  where  case  lead
times  decreased  by  22–38%.  (mans,  russell,  van  der  aalst,  bakker,  &
moleman,  2010 )  predict  the  impact  of  the  use  of  a  schedule-aware
wfms  in  a  gynaecological  oncology  process  by  using  simulation.
the  simulation  output,  however,  showed  mixed  results  for  the
operational  performance  of  the  process.  (li  et  al.,  2013 )  report  on
the  positive  effect  of  implementing  a  wfms  to  manage  the  sonog-
raphy workﬂow.  the  use  of  the  system  signiﬁcantly  decreased
the  patient  waiting  time ,  the  average  number  of  waiting  patients ,and  increased  the  number  of  patients  treated  per  month  increased.
also,  the  staff  workload  stress  decreased  and  patient  satisfaction
increased.
in  addition  to  the  experience  reports  and  single  case  stud-
ies  described  above,  we  have  found  a  limited  number  of  studies
that  compare  operational  impact  of  workﬂow  management  sys-
tem  implementation  in  various  organizations.  kueng  (kueng,  1998,
2000 )  performed  a  qualitative  study,  which  consisted  of  inter-
views  with  eight  people  from  ﬁve  different  companies.  his  analysis
showed  that,  overall,  through  the  use  of  a  wfms,  the  quality  of  the
output  of  the  business  process  improved  and  the  productivity,  mea-
sured  by  lead  time  and  the  volume  of  work ,  increased.  kueng’s  study
does  not  include  quantitative  support  for  these  statements,  nor
insight  in  which  impact  was  realized  in  which  cases  or  organiza-
tions.  oba,  onoda,  and  komoda  (2000)  report  on  the  development
of  a  mathematical  model  for  predicting  the  reduction  rate  of  pro-
cessing  time ,  which  is  based  on  data  of  25  case  studies  in  which  a
speciﬁc  wfms was implemented.  for  the  25  case  studies,  in  gen-
eral,  a  reduction  between  36%  and  85%  was  measured  for  lead  time .
unfortunately, no details  are  given  on  the  characteristics  of  their
study  and  the  exact  data  on  processing  times  measured.  (choenni,
bakker, & baets,  2003 )  present  a  model  for  measuring  the  impact  of
a  wfms  in  an  organization,  assuming  that  performance  indicators
such as speed,  quality,  ﬂexibility,  and  reliability  are  related  to  cost.
the  proposed  model  to  quantify  the  total  cost  is  tested  on  two  case
studies  in  the  same  organization  and  was  evaluated  with  mixed
results.
note that  there  are  various  studies  that  investigate  the  impact
of  wfmss  in  a  broader  context:  the  impact  on  the  employees
and  culture  in  the  organization  (atkinson  &  lam,  1999 ;  doherty
&  perry,  2001 ;  kueng,  2000 ;  mutschler,  rijpkema,  &  reichert,
2007 ;  poelmans,  reijers,  &  recker,  2013 ;  poelmans  &  reijers,
2009 ;  reijers  &  poelmans,  2007 ;  sarmento  &  machado,  2000 ;
vanderfeesten  &  reijers,  2005 ),  studies  that  propose  a  method
or  model  to  describe  the  economic  impact  (gruber  &  huemer,
2009;  mutschler,  2006;  pantazi  &  georgopoulos,  2006 ),  and  stud-
ies  into  tool  selection  (berger,  ellmer,  quirchmayr,  &  zeitlinger,
1997 ;  gruber,  2009 ;  zur  muehlen,  1999 )  and  critical  success  factors
for  implementing  wfmss  (mutschler,  reichert,  &  bumiller,  2008 ;
parkes, 2002 ;  ravesteyn  &  batenburg,  2010 ;  ravesteyn,  2007 ;
trkman,  2010 ).
the  study  described  in  this  paper  ﬁts  within  the  stream  of
research  that  looks  into  operational  performance  associated  to  the
use  of  wfmss.  while  it  touches  on  success  and  fail  factors  for
implementing  a  wfms,  it  does  not  provide  a  full  study  of  all  cul-
tural  or  economic  aspects  involved.  rather,  it  aims  to  broaden  the
investigations  on  the  effectiveness  of  the  implemented  wfms  from
one  organization  (as  is  the  case  in  the  above  described  experience
reports  and  case  studies)  to  a  larger  set  of  organizations.  as  such,
it  aims  to  achieve  quantitative  results  on  process  performance,  in
contrast  to  the  work  by  kueng.  also,  it  builds  on  real  measurements
instead  of  models.  finally,  it  focusses  on  the  long-term  effects  of  the
implementation  by  following  the  organizations  during  a  period  of
10  years.  it  can,  therefore,  be  categorized  as  a  comparative,  quanti-
tative,  and  longitudinal  study  into  the  effectiveness  of  wfmss.  such
a  study  has  not  been  carried  out  to  date.
the  current  paper  builds  on  previous  work  by  the  same  authors
(reijers  &  van  der  aalst,  2005;  reijers,  2004 ),  which  revealed
expectations  on  the  operational  effectiveness  of  a  wfms’s  imple-
mentation  as  based  on  simulation  studies.  in  15  of  the  16  cases
considered  in  the  simulations,  a  signiﬁcant  decrease  of  lead  time
(throughput  time)  was  expected  based  on  the  simulations  (ranging
from  25%  to  83%  decrease  of  lead  time).  for  12  out  of  16  cases  a
signiﬁcant  decrease  in  the  service  time  was  expected  to  take  place
(between 4%  and  47%).  in  this  paper,  we  will  present  the  real  impact
of  a  workﬂow  management  system  implementation  in  the  same128  h.a.  reijers  et  al.  /  international  journal  of  information  management  36  (2016)  126–141
organizations,  compare  these  real  performance  ﬁgures  with  the
expected  outcomes,  and  discuss  the  differences.  moreover,  we  will
give  an  analysis  of  the  success  and  fail  factors  behind  the  imple-
mentation  of  the  wfmss.
3.  research  design
the  study  that  we  report  upon  in  this  paper  is  carried  out  in
accordance  to  the  research  design  that  we  published  in  earlier  work
(reijers  &  van  der  aalst,  2005 ).  to  make  this  paper  self-contained,
we  provide  a  summary  of  the  research  design  in  this  section.
3.1.  objectives  and  motivation
in  this  study,  a  number  of  performance  dimensions  are  of  inter-
est  as  to  assess  the  impact  of  a  wfms  on  operational  performance
of  the  business  process:
- lead  time,  i.e.,  the  time  between  the  arrival  of  a  case  and  its
completion (also known as cycle  time,  completion  time,  and
turnaround time),
- service time, i.e., the  time  spent  by  resources  on  the  processing
of a  case,
- waiting time,  i.e.,  the  time  a  case  is  idle  during  its  life  cycle,
-  utilization  of  involved  human  resources,  i.e.,  the  ratio  of  activity
versus their availability.
for each  of  these,  we  focus  on  the  average  values  as  the  per-
formance  indicators  to  report  upon  in  this  paper  for  the  business
processes  under  consideration.  the  indicators  provide  an  opera-
tional  perspective  on  the  performance  of  a  business  process,  which
is  arguably  the  most  important  concern  for  organizations  that
pursue to  implement  workﬂow  technology.  by  doing  so,  an  organi-
zation  will  generally  aim  to  improve  on  these  indicators.  because
work  is  routed  by  an  automated  system,  work  would  be  expected
to  reach  people  faster  and  less  time  needs  to  be  spent  on  tracking
work  that  is  temporarily  lost.  this  decreases  lead  time  and  wait-
ing  time.  also,  the  use  of  a  wfms  would  allow  people  to  spend  less
time  on  the  coordination  and  transfer  of  work,  which  would  mean
a  decrease  of  service  time.  assuming  that  the  supply  of  work  and
resources  remain  constant,  work  load  and  utilization  will  decrease
as  a  result  of  decreasing  service  time.
against  this  background,  the  working  hypothesis  for  this  study
is  that  the  averages  of  all  four  performance  indicators,  within  the
participating  organizations  for  the  processes  under  consideration,
will  decrease  signiﬁcantly  as  a  result  of  the  use  of  a  wfms.
3.2.  measurement  approach
to  adequately  assess  the  impact  of  implementing  a  wfms  to
support  a  business  process,  we  need  to  measure  the  relevant  per-
formance  indicators  at  two  points  in  time:
(a) before  the  wfms  is  implemented  (ex  ante ),  and
(b)  after  the  wfms  has  become  fully  operational  (ex  post ).
it is  insufﬁcient  to  simply  compare  the  performance  indicators
at  these  two  points  in  time,  because  the  circumstances  may  be  very
different.  for  example,  after  introducing  the  wfms  the  workload
(number  of  cases)  may  have  changed  due  to  external  causes  or  the
number  of  resources  may  have  been  reduced  because  of  efﬁciency
gains.  therefore,  better  insights  into  the  anticipated  and  realized
effects  of  the  wfms  need  to  be  acquired.
three  major  concerns  further  shape  the  design  of  our  measure-
ment  approach.  we  are  interested  in  an  approach  that  allows  for:(1.)  the  validation  of  the  ex  ante  and  ex  post  measurements,
(2.)  the  prediction  of  results  on  basis  of  the  ex  ante  measurement,
(3.)  a  proper  comparison  of  the  ex  ante  and  ex  post  measurements.
to  make  sense  of  the  steps  in  the  measurement  approach  that
have  followed  from  these  concerns,  please  refer  to  fig.  1.  in  this
ﬁgure,  two  axes  can  be  distinguished.  on  the  horizontal  axis,  we
distinguish  the  ex  ante  and  ex  post  situation,  i.e.,  the  state  before  the
implementation  of  the  wfms  and  the  state  after  it  has  become  oper-
ational.  on  the  vertical  axis,  we  distinguish  between  data  gathered
from  real  measurements  of  the  operational  processes  and  synthetic
data  as  generated  by  a  simulation  approach.  further  note  that  there
are  six  research  steps  along  the  various  quadrants,  which  take  place
for  each  measurement  in  the  order  0,  1a,  2a,  3,  2b,  and  1b.
- 0-measurement:  real  measurement  done  on  actual  (not  simu-
lated  data)  before  the  wfms  implementation
-  1a-measurement: measurement done  on  simulated  data  based
on  the  process  and  the  circumstances  before  the  wfms  imple-
mentation
- 2a-measurement:  measurement  done  on  simulated  data  based
on the process  after  the  wfms  implementation  and  the  circum-
stances  before  the  wfms  implementation
- 3-measurement: real  measurement  done  on  actual  (not  simu-
lated  data)  after  the  wfms  implementation
-  2b-measurement:  measurement  done  on  simulated  data  based
on  the  process  and  the  circumstances  after  the  wfms  implemen-
tation
-  1b-measurement:  measurement  done  on  simulated  data  based
on  the  process  before  the  wfms  implementation  and  the  circum-
stances  after  the  wfms  implementation
in the  remainder  we  elaborate  on  the  three  major  concerns
guiding  our  measurement  approach:  validation,  prediction,  and
comparison.
3.2.1. validation
the 0-measurement  and  the  3-measurement  in  the  ﬁgure  are
the  actual  measurements  of  the  business  process  in  the  ex  ante  and
ex post  situation,  respectively.  to  allow  for  validation  of  these  mea-
surements,  discrete  event  simulation  is  used  (law  &  kelton,  1991 ).
the  idea  is  that  a  simulation  model  of  a  business  process  is  built,
which  incorporates  the  actual  structure  of  the  business  process,
simulates  the  arrival  of  cases  as  well  as  the  availability  of  resources,
and  takes  routing  probabilities  of  cases  into  account  as  they  ﬂow
through  the  business  process.  simulation  of  such  a  model  gener-
ates  performance  data,  which  can  be  compared  to  the  performance
measurements  of  the  actual  process.  a  good  ﬁt  between  simulated
and  real  data  provides  support  for  the  validity  of  the  measurements
on  the  real  process.  after  all,  the  results  make  sense  with  respect  to
the  way  the  process  behaves.  signiﬁcant  differences,  however,  put
the  measurements’  validity  into  question.  the  performance  data
that  follows  from  a  simulation  of  the  ex  ante  process  are  referred  to
as  the  1a-measurement.  similarly,  the  2b-measurement  generates
performance  data  on  basis  of  a  simulation  of  the  ex  post  model.
3.2.2. prediction
to address  the  need  for  prediction ,  a  simulation  model  is  built
that  reﬂects  the  desired  situation  after  the  implementation  of  the
wfms.  this  model  incorporates  those  parts  of  the  simulation  model
of  the  current  process  (used  for  the  1a-measurement)  that  are
expected  to  remain  the  same  after  implementation.  new  behav-
ior  will  be  incorporated  as  well  as  to  reﬂect  the  projected  use  of
a  wfms.  speciﬁcally,  activities  that  relate  to  physical  transporta-
tion of  information  that  exist  in  the  current  process  are  eliminated
from  the  model,  because  a  wfms  typically  will  take  care  of  thoseh.a.  reijers  et  al.  /  international  journal  of  information  management  36  (2016)  126–141  129
fig. 1.  a  visualization  of  the  research  approach.
(jablonski & bussler,  1996 ).  furthermore,  planned  initiatives  of  the
organization,  for  example,  to  optimize  the  process  structure  or
change the resource  stafﬁng  can  also  be  incorporated.  the  simu-
lation  of  this  prediction  model  to  forecast  performance  is  referred
to as the  2a-measurement.  a  comparison  between  the  1a-  and  2a-
measurement  delivers  insights  in  the  expected  beneﬁts  of  using  a
wfms before it  has  become  operational.
3.2.3. comparison
to ensure  a  proper  comparison  of  ex  ante  and  ex  post
measurements,  our  main  concern  is  to  eliminate  contextual  inﬂu-
ences.  a  direct  comparison  between  the  0-measurement  and
3-measurement may not  lead  to  the  insights  that  we  seek.  for
example,  suppose  that  in  the  ex  post  situation  the  number  of
involved  staff  is  reduced.  under  these  circumstances,  process  per-
formance  may  not  appear  to  have  improved,  even  though  the
wfms  does  allow  for  carrying  out  that  process  with  less  people.
a  new  simulation  model  is  built  to  minimize  the  effect  of  con-
textual  changes.  this  model,  which  allows  for  a  1b-measurement,
is  derived  from  the  1a-model  that  reﬂects  the  initial  situation.
however,  all  contextual  changes  which  happened  during  the  imple-
mentation  of  the  wfms  are  incorporated  in  the  1b-model.  in  the
previously  used  example  in  which  staff  levels  were  reduced,  this
would  mean  that  the  1b-model  includes  the  original  process  struc-
ture  but  a  reduced  number  of  staff  compared  to  the  original,  initial
situation.  a  comparison  between  the  1b  and  2b-measurements  will,
therefore,  be  more  meaningful  than  a  comparison  between  the  0-
and  3-measurement.
3.3. data  gathering
to obtain  a  broad  and  representative  insight  into  the  effective-
ness  of  wfmss,  the  study’s  aim  is  to  bring  in  as  large  a  number
as  possible  of  organizations  into  the  pool.  one  consideration  is  to
incorporate a  sample  of  organizations  that  represent  both  commer-
cial  and  non-commercial  entities.  furthermore,  the  aim  is  to  alsocover a variety of  different  brands  of  wfmss  as  to  not  skew  the  ﬁnd-
ings  toward  one  particular  vendor.  as  a  practical  consideration,  we
chose to focus  on  the  geographical  area  of  the  netherlands.
candidate  organizations  are  identiﬁed  through  different  ways.
call for participations  are  published  in  professional  magazines
and  presented  at  public  technology  events.  moreover,  consultancy
companies and system  integrators  that  implement  wfmss  on  a  reg-
ular  basis  are  directly  approached  to  gain  access  to  their  clients.
organizations are ideal  candidates  to  participate  in  this  study  if  (1)
a  wfms  has  already  been  selected  prior  to  their  participation  in
their  study  and  (2)  the  target  business  processes  are  determined  to
be  supported  by  this  technology.  on  the  basis  of  such  “buy-in”,  we
can  expect  that  an  organization  will  actually  endeavor  to  take  the
step  toward  implementation.
the  participation  of  an  organization  in  this  study  is  voluntary
and  involves  no  other  compensation  from  the  researchers’  side
than  individual  feedback  on  the  study’s  outcomes,  as  well  as  an
anonymized  benchmark  comparison  with  other  participating  orga-
nizations  by  the  end  of  the  study  period.
participation  of  an  organization  allows  us  to  carry  out  our  mea-
surements,  analyze  business  processes,  and  interact  with  relevant
stakeholders.  the  most  important  categories  of  data  to  be  deter-
mined for  each  business  process  are  as  follows:
- process:  tasks,  milestones,  business  logic,  routing  probabilities
-  resource:  types  of  resources,  work  assignment  policies,  number
and  availability  of  resources
-  performance:  service  times,  lead  times,  arrival  rate  of  new  cases,
work-in-progress,  resource  utilization
for  data  gathering,  the  researchers  used  a  multi-method
approach  (yin,  2009 ),  combining  interviews,  the  analysis  of  existing
process  descriptions,  observations,  management  reports,  self-
registrations  by  people  involved  in  the  process,  and  automatically
collected data  by  existing  information  systems.  for  the  automatic
retrieval  of  data  from  operational  wfmss  we  employed  so-called130  h.a.  reijers  et  al.  /  international  journal  of  information  management  36  (2016)  126–141
table 1
participating
 organizations.
organizationnumberorganization
descriptionnumber of
employeesturnover/budget
(×
 million dfocus of  involved
processes
 in  studynumber of  involved
processes
 in  studycases per  year
(×1000)
1.  governmental  agency  700  60  debt  collection  1  7000
2. health insurer  2300  5200  policy  maintenance  7  250
3. regional  public  works  department  1000  250  invoice  processing  1  20
4.
 local  municipality  300  210  invoice  processing  2  0.7
5.
 insurance  intermediary  5000  29000  policy  maintenance  3  2000
6.
 domiciliary  care  agency  1450  50  human  resource  management  2  1.5
7.
 local municipality 300 90 appeals and  sketch  plans 2  0.1
8. medical insurance  company  6500  5600  medical  screening  and  acceptance  2  5
9. bank  3000  68000  management  savings  accounts  3  70
10. governmental  agency  70  9  granting  of  subsidies  2  0.1
fig.  2.  lead  time  (0-  and  3-measurement).
process mining  techniques  (van  der  aalst,  2011 ).  process  mining
can be seen  as  the  missing  link  between  model-based  process  anal-
ysis  (e.g.,  simulation  and  veriﬁcation)  and  data-oriented  analysis
techniques such  as  machine  learning  and  data  mining.  it  seeks  to
confront  real  event  data  and  process  models  either  (automatically
discovered  ones  or  made  by  hand).
business  processes  were  were  modeled  using  the  protos  mod-
eling tool  (pallas  athena,  1997 ).  the  models  are  used  in  the
process  of  extracting  and  validating  process-related  information
with  business  professionals  and  managers.  furthermore,  they  can
be  enriched  with  performance  data  and  automatically  translated
to simulation models  for  the  petri-net  based  simulation  tool
exspect  (van  der  aalst  et  al.,  2000 ;  van  hee,  somers,  &  voorhoeve,
1989 ).  exspect  is  used  for  the  various  simulation  measurements  as
explained  in  our  research  design.
4.  results
4.1.  overview
in table 1,  an  overview  is  provided  of  all  10  participating  orga-
nizations  in  this  study.  as  can  be  seen,  the  organizations  varysubstantially with  respect  to  their  size,  both  in  terms  of  employees
and turnover.
for  each  organization,  at  least  one  of  their  business  processes
was in  focus  for  our  study;  within  most  organizations  two  or  more
processes  were.  overall,  25  business  processes  that  were  targeted
for  the  implementation  of  a  wfms  are  in  scope.
among  the  participating  organizations,  an  equal  number  of
not-for-proﬁt organizations  (1,  3,  4,  7  and  10)  and  commercial
organizations  were  involved  (2,  5,  6,  8,  and  9).  overall,  these  orga-
nizations  had  selected  their  system  from  four  different  vendors  of
workﬂow  technology,  while  one  organization  opted  for  the  devel-
opment of a  proprietary  workﬂow  solution  (organization  #3).
4.2. implementation  success
by  the  end  of  our  study  period  it  could  be  established  that  from
all  25  processes  in  the  research  scope,  only  seven  processes  were
fully  supported  by  a  wfms  (28%).  this  relates  to  only  ﬁve  organi-
zations  that  implemented  a  wfms  for  at  least  one  of  the  processes
that  were  under  study  from  the  total  of  10  organizations  involved
(50%). these  successful  organizations  were  organizations  3,  4,  6,  7
and  8.h.a.  reijers  et  al.  /  international  journal  of  information  management  36  (2016)  126–141  131
fig. 3.  waiting  time  (0-  and  3-measurement).
the reasons for the other ﬁve organizations  not  to  reach  any
workﬂow
 implementation  at  all  are  as  follows:
-  project  overspending:  in  the  case  of  the  involved  governmental
agency  (organization  1),  the  workﬂow  implementations  had  been
part  of  a  large  automation  project.  the  project  ran  out  of  time
and  over  budget  in  a  considerable  manner.  under  pressure  of  the
national  court  audit,  the  overall  project  was  stopped,  including
the  workﬂow  implementations  under  study.
-  change  of  management:  for  organizations  2,  5,  and  10  the  orig-
inal  management  that  initiated  and  supported  the  workﬂow
implementations  was  replaced.  for  all  three  cases,  the  workﬂow
implementations  were  terminated.
-  change  of  owner:  the  insurance  intermediary  (organization  5)
had  been  part  of  a  much  larger  insurance  company,  which  decided
to  sell  this  part  to  a  foreign  investor.  the  bank  (organization  9)
was  acquired  by  a  large  ﬁnancial  agglomerate.  in  both  cases,  the
workﬂow  implementations  were  discontinued  as  a  result.
as  can be  seen,  the  workﬂow  implementations  were  not  pri-
marily  stopped  on  technical  grounds  or  because  of  disappointing
performance.  rather,  the  decisions  to  stop  should  be  seen  against
the  background  of  larger  organizational  developments.  in  at  least
one  of  these  cases  (organization  1),  we  are  aware  that  workﬂow
implementations  had  been  re-initiated  after  some  time.  however,
we  had  no  access  to  the  processes  to  measure  their  performance.
4.3.  implementation  effects
to  consider  the  effects  of  the  workﬂow  implementations,  we
will  focus  on  the  ﬁve  organizations  that  implemented  a  wfms  for  at
least  one  process.  the  seven  associated  processes  within  this  scope
are  displayed  in  the  table  below.  provided  are  the  ex  ante  and  ex
post  measurements  for  all  performance  indicators  under  consider-
ation.  note  that  these  coincide  with  the  0-  and  3-measurements  in
our overall  approach  (see  section  3.2).  the  impact  of  the  workﬂow
implementation  on  the  four  performance  indicators  is  also  visuallydepicted in figs. 2–5 .  the  reader  may  want  to  refer  to  the  appendix
a
 for  a  detailed  overview  of  the  measurement  data.
for ﬁve of  the  seven  processes,  the  average  lead  time  went  down
according  to  this  direct  comparison  between  the  ex  ante  (0.)  and  ex
post  (3.)  situation.  for  these  cases,  the  reduction  was  in  between
14%  (processing  sick  leaves)  and  74%  (disability  insurance  accep-
tance).  however,  for  the  mutations  of  hrm  records  and  the  appeals
process  the  average  lead  time  increased,  respectively  with  79%  and
38%.
considering the  large  chunk  of  waiting  time  that  lead  time  is
normally  composed  of,  the  development  of  the  waiting  time  per-
formance  closely  followed  the  pattern  of  the  lead  time  for  each
process  under  consideration.  it  went  down  for  the  same  ﬁve  pro-
cesses  for  which  the  lead  time  went  down;  it  went  up  for  the  two
processes  where  lead  time  went  up.
with  respect  to  service  time ,  its  average  went  down  for  all  pro-
cesses  except  one.  for  those  processes  where  a  reduction  took
place,  it  is  least  pronounced  for  life  insurance  acceptance  (16%
reduction) but  the  most  extreme  for  the  mutations  of  hrm  records
we  mentioned  earlier  (75%  reduction).  the  process  for  which  no
reduction  could  be  observed  by  comparing  the  ex  ante  and  ex  post
measurement  is  the  invoice  processing  within  organization  4.  here,
the  average  service  time  actually  went  up  with  24%.
it  can  be  seen  that  the  development  of  the  utilization  rates  fol-
lowed  the  track  of  the  service  time  developments.  for  each  process
where  the  service  time  went  down  (up),  the  utilization  rate  went
down  (up)  as  well.
4.3.1. validation
for the  sake  of  validation,  we  carried  out  the  simulation
measurements  in  accordance  with  the  described  measurement
approach  (section  3.2).  validation  of  the  simulation  model  of  the
ex  ante  (0.)  situation  was  done  with  the  1a-measurement,  and  val-
idation  of  the  simulation  model  of  the  ex  post  (3.)  situation  was
done  with  the  2b-measurement.  for  two  of  the  seven  processes,
it was  not  possible  to  validate  the  3-measurement  as  presented  in
tables  6–9  in  the  appendix  a.  this  was  the  case  for  the  invoice  pro-132  h.a.  reijers  et  al.  /  international  journal  of  information  management  36  (2016)  126–141
fig. 4.  service  time  (0-  and  3-measurement).
fig.  5.  utilization  rate  (0-  and  3-measurement).
cessing  within  organization  4  and  for  the  appeals  process  within
organization  7.  as  for  the  appeals  process,  the  registrations  by  the
wfms  did  not  provide  reliable  data  to  carry  out  a  3-measurement.
considering  the  invoice  process  it  turned  out  that  the  chosen  con-
ﬁguration  of  the  wfms  was  so  inherently  ﬂexible  that  no  reliable
simulation  model  could  be  built.  we  will  return  to  this  issue  in  the
discussion  section.
for  the  ﬁve  other  processes,  simulation  models  could  be  built  of
both  the  situation  before  the  implementation  (1a-measurement)and  after  the  workﬂow  implementation  (2b-measurement)  such
that  the  measured  values,  i.e.,  the  0-measurement  and  the  3-
measurement  were  contained  within  the  99%  conﬁdence  intervals
of  the  simulations.  in  other  words,  the  simulation  models  could
accurately  reproduce  the  values  measured  in  the  real  world.
4.3.2. prediction
in accordance with  our  measurement  approach,  we  used  sim-
ulation  to  predict  the  development  of  the  performance  indicatorsh.a.  reijers  et  al.  /  international  journal  of  information  management  36  (2016)  126–141  133
fig. 6.  comparison  (per  process)  of  the  actually  measured  lead  times  (0-measurement  and  3-measurement)  and  the  lead  times  in  the  four  simulations  (1a,  1b,  2a  and  2b).
fig. 7. comparison  (per  process)  of  the  measured  waiting  times.
under  consideration.  the  aggregated  results  are  shown  in  table  3,
in  which  they  are  listed  in  the  ‘prediction’  columns.  recall  that
these  predictions  are  based  on  a  comparison  of  the  1a-  and
2a-measurements.  figs.  6–9  graphically  depict  the  different  mea-
surements  for  the  four  performance  indicators,  which  can  be  found
in  the  appendix  a.
on  the  basis  of  our  assessment  how  workﬂow  technology  would
impact  the  performance  of  the  business  processes,  the  predic-
tion  models  indicated  that  the  average  lead  time  for  all  processeswould  go  down.  these  reductions  ranged  from  a  modest  decrease
of  9%  (processing  sick  leaves)  up  till  roughly  halving  the  lead  time
(invoice  processing  within  organization  4;  appeals).  from  the  sim-
ulations,  a  similar  expectation  followed  for  the  reduction  of  waiting
time .
the  predictions  for  the  service  time  and  utilization  changes
were  generally  more  modest,  with  reductions  between  2%  and
32%  and,  in  two  cases,  a  slight  increase  of  service  time  and/or
utilization  (see  invoice  processing  within  organization  3  and134  h.a.  reijers  et  al.  /  international  journal  of  information  management  36  (2016)  126–141
fig. 8.  comparison  (per  process)  of  the  measured  service  times.
fig.  9.  comparison  (per  process)  of  the  measured  utilization  rates.  note  that  for  the  appeals  process  it  was  impossible  to  get  reliable  information  one  resources.
the  disability  insurance  acceptance  process  within  organization
8).
4.3.3.
 comparison
the ﬁnal step  in  our  measurement  approach  was  the  compar-
ison  of  the  1b-  and  2b-measurements,  which  arguably  provides
the  fairest  assessment  of  the  contribution  of  workﬂow  technol-
ogy  to  the  expected  improvement  of  business  process  performance.
the  results  are  also  provided  in  table  3,  listed  in  the  ‘compari-
son’  columns.  recall  that  for  two  processes  under  consideration  itturned  out  not  to  be  possible  to  create  a  reliable  simulation  model
that  mimicked  the  situation  after  the  workﬂow  implementation.
we  will  discuss  this  phenomenon  in  more  detail  in  our  discussion
section.
for  almost  all  processes,  each  of  the  performance  measures
developed  in  the  predicted,  positive  direction,  i.e.,  they  decreased
(which  is  a  positive  development  for  the  organization  in  ques-
tion). the  smallest  decrease  is  the  13%  reduction  of  service  time
for  the  disability  insurance  acceptance  process  within  organiza-
tion  8,  while  all  other  reductions  amount  to  at  least  20%  all  the  wayh.a.  reijers  et  al.  /  international  journal  of  information  management  36  (2016)  126–141  135
table 2
ex
 ante  and  ex  post  measurements  workﬂow  implementations  (*:  resource  data  was  not  available).
process  org.  number  lead  time  (days)  service  time  (minutes)  waiting  time  (days)  utilization  (rate)
ex  ante  (0)  ex  post  (3)  ex  ante  (0)  ex  post  (3)  ex  ante  (0)  ex  post  (3)  ex  ante  (0)  ex  post  (3)
invoice  processing  3  15.91  12.90  17.75  14.44  15.87  12.87  0.0947  0.0676
invoice
 processing  4  13.34  11.13  19.6  24.23  13.29  11.07  0.4364  0.5504
mutations
 hrm  record  6  9.42  16.88  22.86  5.66  9.37  16.87  0.2100  0.0400
processing
 sick leaves 6  1.91 1.64 13.99  7.21  1.88  1.62  0.6800  0.2850
appeals 7 106.00  146.00  24.50  12.60  103.00  145.00  0.6618  *
disability insurance  acceptance  8  45.51  11.79  59.87  45.53  45.37  11.68  0.2206  0.1430
life
 insurance  acceptance  8  20.06  11.84  35.01  29.48  19.98  11.77  0.3258  0.3098
table  3
prediction
 and  comparison  (**:  no  reliable  simulation  model  could  be  obtained).
process  org.  number lead time change  (%) service  time  change  (%) waiting  time  change (%) utilization  change (%)
prediction(1a–2a)comparison
(1b–2b)prediction
(1a–2a)comparison
(1b–2b)prediction
(1a–2a)comparison
(1b–2b)prediction
(1a–2a)comparison
(1b–2b)
invoice  processing  3  −25  −20  −2  −26  −25  −20  5  −42
invoice
 processing  4  −48  **  −32  **  −48  **  −35  **
mutations
 hrm  records  6  −43  147  −16  −77  −43  149  −13  −94
processing
 sick leaves 6 −9 −50 −22 −48  −8  −50  −24  −68
appeals  7  −48  **  −6  **  −49  **  −15  **
disability
 insurance acceptance  8 −15  −67  6  −13  −15  −67  6  −31
life insurance  acceptance  8  −18  −61  −2  −38  −18  −61  −1  −41
up  to  94%.  the  big  exception  is  the  mutation  of  hrm  records  pro-
cess,  where  lead  time  and  waiting  time  increased,  with  147%  and
149% respectively  (both  negative  developments).  interestingly,  the
largest  overall  effect  also  takes  place  for  the  mutations  hrm  records
process:  a  77%  reduction  of  the  service  time  and  a  94%  reduction  of
the  utilization.  the  other  exception  is  the  invoice  processing  within
organization  3  where  the  utilization  rate  did  not  increase  with  5%,
but  drop  with  42%  (a  positive  development).
from  inspecting  table  3  and  figs.  6–9  it  can  be  noted  that  for
nearly  all  performance  measurements  and  all  processes  in  scope
the  real  contribution  much  surpassed  the  predicted  improvements.
this  is  an  indication  for  the  prediction  approach  to  be  on  the
conservative  side.  the  notable  exception  is  again  formed  by  the
development  of  the  lead  time  and  waiting  time  for  the  mutations
of  hrm  records:  these  did  not  go  down,  but  actually  increased.  we
will  inspect  this  particular  process  in  more  detail  in  our  discussion
section.
finally, it  is  of  interest  to  compare  the  direct  comparison  of  the  ex
ante  (0.)  and  ex  post  (3.)  measurements  as  provided  in  table  2  with
the  comparison  of  the  1b-  and  2b-measurements  in  table  3.  for  the
sake  of  convenience,  the  combined  data  is  presented  in  table  4.
one  major  insight  from  this  table  is  that  most  of  the  direct  com-
parisons  between  the  ex  ante  and  ex  post  situation  (0–3)  are  fairly
comparable  with  the  simulated  comparisons  (1b–2b).  in  13  of  the
20  cases  where  a  comparison  can  be  made,  the  difference  is  20
percentage  points  or  less;  for  5  of  these  13  cases,  the  difference  is
even  less  than  5  percentage  points.  remarkably,  and  underlining
the  value  of  the  approach  we  have  taken,  for  those  7  cases  where
the  difference  is  larger  than  20  percentage  points  the  data  from
the  simulated  comparisons  is  larger  than  the  direct  comparisons
(when  considering  the  numbers  in  absolute  terms).  this  can  be
taken  as  hints  of  actions  by  organizations  to  ﬂatten  the  effects  of
the  actual  change  that  is  tied  to  the  workﬂow  implementation,  e.g.,
pulling  away  resources  from  processes  that  perform  better  when
supported  by  a  wfms.  in  these  cases  speciﬁcally,  it  can  be  argued
that  the  chosen  measurement  approach  provides  a  more  realistic
assessment  than  the  naïve,  direct  comparison  between  the  ex  ante
and  ex  post  situation  (0–3).
concluding,  the  measurements  have  shown  that  in  the  cases  in
which  the  project  led  to  an  implementation  of  a  wfms,  the  opera-
tional  performance  of  the  process  improved  and  often  substantially
so.5.  discussion
in  this  part  of  the  paper,  we  will  be  discussing  various  aspects
of  our  study.  we  will  successively  look  in  more  detail  into  ﬂagged
issues  in  the  collected  data,  we  will  explore  the  limited  overall  suc-
cess  rate  of  the  workﬂow  implementations,  and  we  will  reﬂect  on
the  usefulness  and  limitations  of  the  employed  methodology.  the
last  part  will  also  include  recommendations  to  those  who  aim  to
use  the  methodology  in  other  settings.
5.1. detailed data  analysis
two issues  emerge  from  our  results  section  that  call  for  further
inspection  of  the  collected  data:
(1) the  impossibility  to  build  a  reliable  simulation  model  for  two
of  the  involved  processes,  i.e.,  invoice  processing  within  orga-
nization  4  and  the  appeals  process  within  organization  7,
(2)  the  remarkable  increase  of  lead  time  and  waiting  time  for  the
processing  mutations  of  hrm  records  within  organization  6.
in this  section  both  issues  are  explored  in  detail.
5.1.1. reliability simulation  model
for both  the  invoice  processing  within  organization  4  and  the
appeals  process  within  organization  7  we  did  not  manage  to  build
a  reliable  simulation  model.  the  reasons,  however,  differed.
in  the  case  of  organization  4  (invoice  processing),  we  could
establish  through  inspecting  the  execution  data  that  the  wfms  had
been  designed  to  allow  for  a  highly  ﬂexible  way  of  working.  the
process  participants  indeed  made  use  of  this  ﬂexibility.  from  the
data  on  3979  cases  (invoices)  that  were  available  to  us,  we  could
determine  that  one,  generic  execution  path  was  executed  for  1000
cases.  the  remaining  2979  cases,  however,  were  routed  in  553  dif-
ferent  ways  through  the  process.  in  other  words,  each  of  these  paths
was  traversed  for  on  average  only  5  cases,  which  is  less  than  0.1%
of  all  cases  studied.  while  we  could  capture  all  these  paths  in  a
protos  model,  our  attempts  to  carry  out  a  realistic  simulation  of
this  inherently  ﬂexible  process  on  the  basis  of  the  collected  data
did  not  succeed.  speciﬁcally,  in  contrast  to  the  other  processes,  we
could not  reproduce  99%  conﬁdence  intervals  for  the  lead  times
that  included  the  actual  measurements.  in  effect,  our  best  attempt136  h.a.  reijers  et  al.  /  international  journal  of  information  management  36  (2016)  126–141
table 4
direct
 vs.  simulated  comparison  (*:  resource  data  was  not  available;  **:  no  reliable  simulation  model  could  be  obtained).
process org lead tim e 
(day s)serv ice tim e 
(minute s)waiting time 
(day s)utilizatio n 
(ra te)
0-3 1b-2b 0-3 1b-2b 0-3 1b-2b 0-3 1b-2b
invo ice 
proc essing3-3.01
(-19%)-3.37
(-20%)-3.31
(-19%)-5.01
(-26%)-3.00
(-19%)-3.36 
(-20%)-0.0271
(-29%)-0.0526
(-42%)
invo ice 
proc essing4-2.21
(-17 %)**4.63
(24%)**-2.22
(-17%)**0.1140
(26%)**
mutation s 
hrm 
reco rd67.46
(79 %)10.08
(147%)-17.2 
(-75%)-19.24
(-77%)7.5
(80%)10.13
(149%)-0.1700
(-81%)-0.1500
(-94%)
processing 
sick  lea ves6-0.27
(-14 %)-1.93
(-50 %)-6.78
(-48%)-6.56
(-48%)-0.26
(-14%)-1.91
(-50%)-0.3950
(-58%)-0.5850
(-68%)
appea ls 740.00
(38%)**-11.9
(-49%)**42.00
(41%)** * **
disab ility 
insura nce 
acceptance8-8.22
(-41 %)-23 .69
(-67 %)-14.34
(-24%)-7.00
(-13%)-33.69
(-74%)-23.68
(-67%)-0.0776
(-35%)-0.0629
(-31%)
life 
insura nce 
acceptance8-33 .72
(-74 %)-18 .67
(-61 %)-5.53
(-16%)-17.88
(-38%)-8.21
(-41%)-18.63
(-61%)-0.0160
(-5%)-0.2255
(-41%)
to  reproduce  lead  times  on  the  basis  of  a  simulation  model  stayed
approximately 25% below the actually measured lead  times.  our
best
 clariﬁcation  for  this  is  that  complex  yet  rare  ﬂows  of  cases  in
reality are difﬁcult  to  capture  in  a  generic  simulation  model.  still,
they  do  have  an  impact  on  the  actual  lead  times  of  processes  in
reality.
in the  case  of  organization  7  –  the  other  organization  where
we had difﬁculty  creating  a  reliable  simulation  model  –  we  col-
lected  data  from  the  wfms  on  87  cases  (appeals)  that  had  been
processed in almost  a  year.  by  screening  the  extracted  data,  we
established  that  the  average  service  time  for  these  cases  amounted
to  approximately  12.6  min.  yet,  the  service  time’s  standard  devi-
ation  of  13.6  min  surpassed  that  number.  from  our  observations
of  the  process  participants,  it  turned  out  that  the  recorded  activity
durations  by  the  wfms  often  did  not  reﬂect  the  real  time  people
spent  on  the  process.  overly  long  registrations  were  caused  by  users
improperly  terminating  their  workﬂows  clients,  such  that  time  kept
on being  counted  by  the  system  as  active  work.  overly  short  regis-
trations  were  caused  by  activities  that  were  in  fact  executed  in  the
organization  but  not  during  the  interaction  with  the  wfms.  in  other
words,  the  wfms  was  often  only  used  to  sign  off  activities  that  had
already  taken  place  outside  the  control  of  the  system.  the  wfms
had  effectively  become  a  “shadow  system”  (cf.  strong  &  volkoff,
2004 ).  as  a  result,  the  collected  data  on  service  times  (and,  by  exten-
sion,  on  the  resource  utilization)  could  not  be  considered  reliable
as  a  basis  for  simulation.
while  for  the  two  processes  discussed  at  this  point  no  simulation
models  could  be  built,  the  insights  from  this  closer  data  inspection
itself  are  valuable.  clearly,  our  inability  to  simulate  the  process  of
appeals  within  organization  4  provides  an  insight  into  the  limita-
tions  of  a  simulation  approach.  moreover,  for  the  management  of
organization 7,  the  use  of  the  wfms  as  a  “shadow  system”  instead
of  as  a  support  system  for  the  actual  process  was  quite  a  surprise.
it  triggered  a  tighter  enforcement  of  proper  usage  of  the  system.  in
retrospect,  the  involved  management  stated:  “our  implementation
stayed  too  close  to  the  original  situation.  the  people  involved  in  it
had  too  much  freedom  [to  work  around  the  system]  and  exploitedthat.”  unfortunately,  considering  the  low  number  of  appeals  that
is processed yearly, it was not possible  to  collect  sufﬁcient  reli-
able
 data  in  the  new  setting  within  the  scope  of  this  study  to  build
simulation models for  the  1b-  and  2b-measurements.
5.1.2. deviant  developments
the other peculiar case  that  is  worth  looking  into  is  the  muta-
tions  of  hrm  records  within  organization  6.  in  contrast  to  our
prediction,  the lead time  in  this  process  did  not  decrease.  in  fact,
the  average  lead  time  more  than  doubled.  on  closer  inspection,  this
turns out to  be  related  to  a  change  in  the  process  set-up.  instead
of  the  hrm  administration  staff  members  adding  all  data  on  a  per-
sonnel  mutation  in  the  hrm  system  themselves,  in  the  new  set-up
this  is  done  by  the  administrative  staff  of  the  department  where  the
person  in  question  has  become  employed  and/or  moves  from.  the
idea  is  that  this  is  more  efﬁcient  than  having  the  department  staff
ﬁrst  enter  this  data  on  a  paper  form,  after  which  the  hrm  admin-
istration  staff  basically  has  to  copy  this  information  into  the  hrm
system.
however, to  make  this  new  procedure  work,  an  additional  con-
trol  step  is  added  for  a  hrm  manager.  this  step  is  there  to  check
the  quality  of  the  data  as  entered  by  the  department  and  to  autho-
rize  the  mutation.  while  this  is  a  routine  task,  we  observed  that  the
task  had  a  low  priority  for  hrm  managers.  they  only  periodically
checked  for  pending  cases  requiring  this  task,  which  led  to  substan-
tial  waiting  times.  in  one  speciﬁc  instance  we  observed  a  mutation
that  remained  in  a  state  awaiting  authorization  by  a  hrm  manager
for  nearly  6  weeks.  in  our  simulation  to  predict  the  effects  of  using  a
wfms  in  this  situation,  we  did  include  the  additional  authorization
step.  however,  we  were  not  able  to  anticipate  the  massive  delay
associated  to  including  this  step.
we  confronted  the  involved  organization  with  the  effects  of  the
authorization  step  on  the  lead  time  performance,  but  it  did  not
really  raise  concerns.  the  77%  reduction  of  the  average  service  time,
which  also  occurred,  was  valued  to  such  an  extent  that  the  increase
of lead  times  was  considered  acceptable.  during  our  interview  with
the  ceo  of  the  organization,  he  commented  that  the  introduction  ofh.a.  reijers  et  al.  /  international  journal  of  information  management  36  (2016)  126–141  137
table 5
success
 factors  for  a  wfms  implementation.
application  management  no  redesign  management  support  change  strategy  size
3.  regional  public  works  department  +  +  +
4.
 local  municipality  +  +  +  +
6. domiciliary care  agency  +  +  +  +
7. local  municipality  +  +  +  +
8.
 medical  insurance  company  +  +  +  +
several  new  managers  within  the  hrm  department  was  related  to
the  issue:  “these  new  managers  are  insufﬁciently  aware  that  they
must  take  a  look  at  a  screen  from  time  to  time.”  by  raising  their
awareness  of  the  issue  and  with  proper  incentives,  the  expectation
would  be  that  the  lead  time  would  go  down  over  time.  within  the
scope  of  this  study,  we  were  not  able  to  verify  this.  the  case  does
reveal  that  a  seemingly  routine  step  may  have  a  huge  effect  on  the
performance  of  a  process  as  a  whole  when  the  incentives  to  take
on  this  work  are  not  in  place.
5.2. organizational dimension
another intriguing outcome of this  study  is  that  only  half  of  the
involved organizations  succeeded  in  the  original  aim  to  implement
a wfms at all. a  statistical  analysis  of  the  underlying  factors  of  this
limited success  rate  seems  ill-advised  given  the  small  number  of
cases in our  study.  what  we  wish  to  do  here  is  to  reﬂect,  with  due
caution,  in  a  qualitative  fashion  on  the  potential  factors  that  relate
to the success  or  failure  of  workﬂow  implementations.
first  of  all,  no  tendency  of  either  not-for-proﬁt  or  commer-
cial  organizations  to  be  more  successful  in  implementing  a  wfms
could  be  detected.  two  commercial  organizations  and  three  not-
for-proﬁt  organizations  managed  to  implement  a  wfms.  that  is
not  too  different  from  the  even  distribution  between  these  in  the
overall  sample.  secondly,  the  data  does  not  suggest  that  the  brand
of  wfms  is  a  factor  of  inﬂuence.  two  systems  were  included  in
our  data  set  that  were  implemented  more  than  once,  which  would
allow  for  identifying  a  tendency.  however,  these  turned  out  to  be
evenly  connected  to  successful  and  unsuccessful  implementations.
finally,  the  size  of  the  organizations  shows  no  distinctive  relation
to the  successful  cases.  the  largest  organization  successfully  imple-
mented  a  wfms,  as  well  as  the  two  organizations  that  were  the
second  and  third  smallest  in  the  sample.  the  remaining  two  suc-
cessful  cases  were  in  the  middle  with  respect  to  the  number  of
employees.
in our  search  for  other  organizational  factors  that  could  be  tied
to  the  success  of  implementation,  we  rely  on  the  interviews  we
carried  out  with  the  project  managers  within  the  ﬁve  organiza-
tions  that  managed  to  successfully  take  a  wfms  into  production.
during  these  interviews,  which  lasted  between  1.5  and  2  h,  we  pre-
sented  the  outcomes  of  this  study  to  those  project  managers  and
inquired  into  the  factors  that  contributed  to  the  success  of  the  work-
ﬂow  implementation.  from  these  interviews,  ﬁve  topics  emerged
that  were  mentioned  across  multiple  organizations:  application
management,  redesign,  management  support,  change  strategy,  and
their  organizational  size  (see  table  5).
the  interviewees  of  all  ﬁve,  successful  organizations  empha-
sized  their  action  to  set  up  an  approachable  and  responsive
application  management  function  within  their  organization  as  a
factor  that  positively  inﬂuenced  the  success  of  their  workﬂow
implementation.  through  this  function,  end  users  of  the  wfms  had
the  opportunity  to  report  on  issues  that  hindered  optimal  use  of
the  system.  by  quickly  following  up  on  such  issues,  the  wfms  could
quickly  become  robust  and  end  user  satisfaction  was  maintained  at
a  satisfactory  level.
a second  factor  that  was  mentioned  by  all  interviewees  was  to
not  drastically  redesign  the  business  processes  they  were  aiming  tosupport  with  a  wfms.  while  everyone  agreed  that  certain  historical
parts  of  a  process  do  not  make  sense  once  a  wfms  is  in  place,  the
interviewees  also  considered  it  vital  to  not  confront  an  organization
with  too  many  changes  at  the  same  time.  as  the  project  manager  of
organization  4  mentioned:  “we  consciously  decided  not  to  change
too  much.  we  did  not  want  to  change  both  the  procedure  and  the
technology.”  the  project  manager  overseeing  the  implementation
in  organization  3  stated:  “we  more  or  less  implemented  the  as-
is  situation.”  this  is  a  remarkable  outcome,  given  the  literature
surrounding  this  topic  (e.g.,  (georgakopoulos,  hornick,  &  sheth,
1995 ;  kueng,  2000 ;  yang,  2011 )).  the  phrase  “don’t  pave  the  cow
paths”  is  often  used  in  in  the  context  of  business  process  reengi-
neering  (bpr)  (markus  &  robey,  1998 ).  the  line  of  thinking  is  that
one should  not  automate  existing  processes,  but  rather  start  from
scratch.  however,  our  ﬁndings  indicate  that  sometimes  it  is  better
to  ﬁrst  “pave  a  cowpath”  rather  than  using  a  “big  bang”  approach
that  is  often  advocated  (hammer,  1990 ).  in  a  “big  bang”,  the  busi-
ness  processes  drastically  change  when  introducing  a  wfms  as  to
exploit  new  improvement  opportunities.
a  third  factor,  which  was  mentioned  by  interviewees  from  4  of
the  5  organizations,  was  the  support  from  top  management  for  the
workﬂow  initiative.  clearly,  this  is  a  well-known  success  factor  in
the  literature  on  information  systems  implementations  (sharma  &
yetton,  2003 ).  the  ceo  of  organization  6  positioned  himself  as  the
“passionate  ﬁre”  energizing  the  implementation.  the  project  man-
ager  of  organization  7  stated:  “i  have  always  congratulated  myself
with  a  board  that  communicated  from  day  1,  each  day,  year  in  year
out, that  we  would  be  doing  workﬂow—period.”
two  other  factors  were  also  mentioned  in  the  interviews,
although  they  received  less  than  widespread  support.  first,  the
particular  change  strategy  employed  was  mentioned  by  project
managers  of  three  organizations.  the  general  pattern,  if  any,  seems
to  be  that  end  users  were  explained  in  no  uncertain  terms  that
they  were  expected  to  work  with  the  wfms.  this  stance  was  also
enforced  rigorously.  the  project  manager  of  organization  4  put  it
as  follows:  “from  the  moment  on  that  you  implement  a  digital  pro-
cedure,  you  should  allow  ‘no  escape’  to  follow  the  paper  procedure
still.”  secondly,  the  size  of  the  organization  was  mentioned.  the  same
project  manager  of  organization  4  stressed  the  importance  of  being
mid-sized:  “we  are  big  enough  to  reap  the  beneﬁts  of  using  a  wfms,
but  we  are  not  too  big  so  that  no-one  knows  each  other.  that  is  the
perfect balance.”  surprisingly,  also  the  interviewees  from  organi-
zation  8  mentioned  size  as  a  success  factor.  despite  the  large  size
of  the  organization  8  overall,  the  relative  independence  of  its  med-
ical  unit  in  which  the  implementation  took  place  was  emphasized:
“because  our  unit  is  a  small  one,  we  were  able  to  manage  the  project
ourselves;  our  application  management  was  able  to  implement
changes  to  the  workﬂow  itself,  which  is  a  ‘must  have’:  otherwise,
the  system  would  not  be  accepted  by  the  end  users.”
in  addition  to  the  interview  rounds  we  mentioned,  we  were  also
able  to  interview  the  responsible  projects  managers  within  orga-
nization  1.  recall  that  this  is  an  organization  where  the  workﬂow
implementation  project  had  been  put  to  a  stop  altogether.  unaware
of  the  previously  described  outcomes  of  the  other  interviews,  the
two  project  managers  mentioned  three  causes  for  the  project’s  fail-
ure.  first  of  all,  the  project  had  become  uncontrollable  because  “we
were  simultaneously  redesigning  the  business  process,  building138  h.a.  reijers  et  al.  /  international  journal  of  information  management  36  (2016)  126–141
new  systems,  and  pushing  new  technology  [into  the  organization].
it  was  too  much,  too  far.”  secondly,  the  it  organization  had  not
been  properly  organized:  development  and  application  manage-
ment  had  not  become  separate  functions.  as  a  result,  developers
also  had  to  act  as  it  support  staff,  which  disrupted  their  develop-
ment  duties.  thirdly,  the  interaction  between  higher  management
and  the  project  team  was  problematic  throughout  the  project.  “it
took  very  long  before  issues  were  resolved  and,  very  often,  expert
opinions  [of  the  project  team]  were  overruled  by  higher  man-
agement.”  remarkably,  these  issues  mirror  the  three  factors  that
were  mentioned  by  the  successful  project  managers  most  often:
little  or  no  redesign,  the  set-up  of  application  management,  and
strong  management  support.  this  provides  some  conﬁdence  that
these  are  indeed  among  the  crucial  issues  with  respect  to  workﬂow
implementations.  note  that  these  ﬁndings  are  also  in  line  with  the
critical  success  factors  for  workﬂow  implementation  introduced  by
(parkes,  2002 ),  which  was  brieﬂy  touched  upon  in  our  related  work
section.
5.3. methodology
as explained, we were  interested  in  pursuing  the  proposed
methodology that  involved  both  real  measurements  and  simulated
ones for the purposes  of  validation ,  prediction  and  comparison .  we
will ﬁrst  reﬂect  on  each  of  these  features.  next,  we  include  rec-
ommendations to those  who  aim  to  use  the  methodology  in  other
settings.
5.3.1. reﬂection
the validation  of  the  actual  measurements  of  the  business  pro-
cess  in  the  ex  ante  (0.)  and  ex  post  (3.)  situation  by  the  1a  and
2b  measurements  lived  up  to  our  expectations.  we  were  able  to
develop  conﬁdence  in  our  understanding  of  the  different  processes
through  our  approach  of  mirroring  the  behavior  of  these  in  our  sim-
ulation  models.  in  two  instances,  i.e.,  the  invoice  process  within
organization  4  and  the  appeals  process  within  organization  7,  we
could  not  reproduce  the  behavior  of  the  ex  post  settings.  in  both
cases,  we  believe  that  the  use  of  simulation  helped  us  to  make
the  proper  decision  not  to  include  these  in  our  overall  evalua-
tion. what  seems  to  be  a  point  for  improvement  in  our  research
set-up  is  a  more  iterative  approach  to  the  development  of  our  val-
idation  models.  this  would  also  allow  for  either  gathering  of  more
data  instead  of  the  mostly  one-off  collection  that  we  set  out  for  or
allowing  the  organization  to  change  the  use  of  the  wfms.  both  of
these  would  extend  the  data  points  to  be  considered  in  a  study  like
this.
in  retrospect,  also  the  prediction  feature  played  out  rather  well.
the  predicted  directions  of  the  changes  in  performance  indicators
were  conﬁrmed  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases,  with  the  notable
exception  of  the  hrm  process.  as  noted,  the  predictions  we  devel-
oped  were  on  the  conservative  side,  which  is  a  mixed  blessing.  if  a
decision  to  implement  a  technology  like  workﬂow  would  be  based
upon  it,  then  the  results  would  actually  vastly  exceed  one’s  expec-
tations.  the  downside  is  that  an  organization  may  not  decide  to
go  ahead  at  all  with  such  a  technology  on  the  basis  of  projected
improvements  that  seem  too  marginal.  note  that  in  our  sample
the  smallest  predicted  improvement  was  a  9%  lead  time  reduc-
tion  within  processing  sick  leaves,  which  may  still  be  an  attractive
prospect  for  many  organizations.
the  most  critical  reﬂection  should  be  devoted  to  the  compar-
ison  feature  of  our  approach.  what  we  did  not  expect  is  that  the
simulation  of  an  ex  post  situation  would  not  succeed  (see  our  pre-
vious  point).  this  actually  rendered  the  comparison  we  intended
infeasible  in  two  cases.  in  hindsight,  we  would  have  preferred  to
include more  points  of  measurement  in  our  initial  set-up  despite
the  many  complexities  involved  in  gaining  access  to  the  processeswithin  the  organizations  on  a  more  frequent  basis.  on  the  positive
side,  however,  for  the  majority  of  cases  we  were  able  to  isolate  the
effect  of  using  a  system  like  a  wfms  from  other  contextual  changes
between  the  two  points  of  measurement.  we  believe  that  this  is  an
extremely  valuable  asset.  this  is  particularly  so,  since  it  appears  that
a  number  of  organizations  are  already  “cashing  in”  performance
improvements  rather  quickly.  recall  the  seven  comparisons  from
table  4  where  the  changes  according  to  our  comparison  were  much
bigger  than  what  the  direct  comparisons  disclose.  in  most  of  these
cases,  the  operational  management  already  seemed  to  have  gradu-
ally  decreased  the  staff  levels  before  the  ex  post  measurement  since
the  improvements  of  the  wfms  would  allow  for  doing  so.  in  other
words,  through  our  study  it  becomes  evident  what  the  net  effect
of  using  workﬂow  technology  is;  this  would  otherwise  be  rather
difﬁcult  to  establish.
5.3.2.  recommendations
at this point, it  seems  worthwhile  to  discuss  the  concepts  of
validation,  prediction,  and  comparison  as  key  building  blocks  of
the presented methodology.  this  is  considered  useful  for  those  who
wish  to  apply  the  methodology  within  other  evaluation  studies.
in case of  the  methodology  being  applied  in  another  setting,  it
will  be  clear  that  the  comparison  part  is  crucial  to  ﬁlter  out  effects
that are beyond  the  investigator’s  interest.  this  stage  is  not  pos-
sible  to  reach  without  the  use  of  simulation,  which  implies  that
-  aside  from  access  to  ﬁne-grained,  real-world  data  –  knowledge
about  this  technique  and  access  to  simulation  software  are  essential
ingredients  to  apply  the  proposed  methodology.
validation  is  a  stage  that  we  would  recommend  under  all  circum-
stances.  however,  for  a  research  team  that  is  not  acquainted  with
simulation  it  is  even  a  fundamental  milestone.  it  helps  to  check
whether  the  team’s  understanding  of  the  system  under  study  is
sufﬁciently  deep.  note  that  validation  is  only  possible  if  there  is  at
least  one  performance  metric  that  (a)  can  be  directly  observed  in
the  real  world  and  (b)  can  be  determined  through  a  simulation  that
uses  real  data  on  inﬂuencing  parameters.  in  our  case,  this  perfor-
mance  metric  was  lead  time ,  which  is  inﬂuenced  by  the  structure  of
the  process  on  the  one  hand  and  observable  data  on  service  times,
arrival  rates,  and  routing  probabilities  on  the  other.
the stage  of  prediction  seems  to  be  optional  in  all  settings.
its  most  important  application  is  to  give  various  stakeholders  an
insight  into  the  expected  effects  of  a  certain  initiative.  this  may  help
the  take  the  initiative  forward  and  to  strengthen  the  conﬁdence  in
the  research  team.  also,  a  research  team  may  use  this  stage  to  verify
its  own  understanding  of  a  topic.
aside  from  these  concepts,  it  should  be  emphasized  that  the
data  gathering  step  of  the  methodology  is  critical,  sensitive  and
very  laborious.  as  to  the  data  gathering  for  the  0-measurement,  we
recommend  to  seek  for  measurement  systems  that  are  already  in
place  to  speed  up  this  phase.  one  can  rely  on  these  as  long  as  they
are  actively  used  by  the  organization  for  its  own  purposes  and  when
the  opportunity  exists  to  cross-check  such  measurement  systems
with  other,  independently  gathered  data.  it  is  often  surprising  how
much  crucial  data  is  stored  by  individuals  in  excel  sheets,  for  exam-
ple.  in  our  experience,  too,  actual  measurements  as  well  as  real-life
observations  by  the  research  team  are  vastly  superior  to  indirect
information  acquired  through  interviews.  for  example,  it  seems
very  difﬁcult  for  people  to  develop  a  good  understanding  of  the  dis-
tribution  of  events,  even  when  they  may  have  a  good  understanding
of  what  average  ﬁgures  are.  finally,  a  very  important  recommen-
dation  is  to  enrich  the  concept  of  study,  e.g.,  a  system  or  a  new  way
of  working,  with  automated  data  registration  capabilities.  in  our
case,  a  workﬂow  systems  records,  as  part  of  its  operation,  valuable
events,  such  as  the  time  stamp  when  a  work  item  is  completed.
this is  an  aspect  which  we  readily  exploited  and  considerable  sped
up  the  process.  similar  it  artefacts  could  be  extended  with  similarh.a. reijers  et  al.  /  international  journal  of  information  management  36  (2016)  126–141  139
capabilities  against  little  cost,  but  to  the  great  advantage  of  carrying
out  an  effectiveness  study.
6.  conclusion
this  paper  reports  on  the  ﬁrst  longitudinal  study  into  the  effec-
tiveness  of  workﬂow  management  technology  on  organizational
performance.  as  such,  it  contributes  to  a  better  understanding  of
the  beneﬁts  that  this  technology  can  bring  about,  speciﬁcally  in
logistic  terms.  one  major  insight  is  that  from  a  sample  of  ten
organizations  that  were  followed,  only  half  of  them  managed  to
successfully  implement  a  wfms  for  at  least  one  of  the  business
processes  they  had  targeted.  even  so,  the  performance  improve-
ments  for  these  processes  overall  were  substantial.  it  seems  fair
to  conclude  from  these  observations  that  the  implementation  of
workﬂow  technology  is  far  from  trivial,  but  that  the  organizations
which  manage  to  accomplish  this  greatly  proﬁt  from  it.  in  that
sense,  it provides much stronger  and  more  direct  support  for  the
use of  workﬂow  technology  than  was  currently  available,  see  e.g.,
(herrmann & hoffmann, 2005 ).
as part  of  this  project,  an  innovative  measurement  approach
was developed that  was  partly  based  on  the  use  of  simulation.
overall,  this  approach  positively  contributed  to  the  validity  of  our
measurement, even though  its  use  ruled  out  the  inclusion  of  two
cases.  a  noteworthy  strength  of  the  approach  is  that  it  helped  neu-
tralize  organizational  measures  that  aimed  to  counter  the  effects
of  implementing  a  wfms.
this  work  also  provided  tentative  but  consistent  insights  into
the  success  factors  behind  workﬂow  implementations.  the  set-up
of  a  responsive  application  management  function,  limited  redesign
of  the  processes  to  be  supported  by  a  wfms,  and  ﬁrm  manage-
ment  support  for  the  initiatives  are  the  most  clear  among  these.
these  insights  partly  tap  into  existing  success  factors  behind  large
it  implementations  but  seem  to  bear  great  practical  value  for  orga-
nizations  that  speciﬁcally  consider  to  start  using  a  wfms.
our  future  work  will  focus  on  the  use  of  (automatically)  col-
lected  data  to  discover  and  assess  improvement  opportunities  for
organizational  performance.  in  this  paper,  we  brieﬂy  mentioned
the  use  of  process  mining  technology  to  extract  logs  from  opera-
tional  wfmss,  which  were  part  of  our  ex  post  measurements.  suchmeasurements  also  provide  clues  about  which  parts  of  a  business
process  could  proﬁt  from  changes  in  policies,  stafﬁng  levels,  or  use
of  information  technology.  while  some  of  our  previous  work  has
already  focused  on  the  use  of  process  mining  technology  for  the
assessment  of  organizational  performance  (e.g.,  (van  der  aalst  et  al.,
2007 )),  we  do  believe  that  there  are  numerous  other  opportunities
to  use  data  to  guide  organizations  to  higher  levels  of  effectiveness.
using  process  mining  in  longitudinal  case  studies  enables  a  new
perspective on  process  management.  processes  and  their  context
evolve  over  time  and  it  is  interesting  to  understand  differences
between  distinct  periods.  the  introduction  of  a  wfms  is  just  one  of
many  possible  changes  that  may  impact  operational  performance,
e.g.,  the  introduction  of  a  new  erp  system  may  also  inﬂuence  pro-
cesses  dramatically.  moreover,  it  is  interesting  to  compare  different
organizations  (or  organizational  units  or  customer  groups)  under-
going similar  changes  (cross-organizational  process  mining).  the
methodology  presented  in  this  paper  can  be  used  for  such  compar-
isons.
many  workﬂow  projects  are  aborted  prematurely  and  our  qual-
itative evaluation of workﬂow  implementation  success  factors
suggests  that  more  research  is  needed  to  mitigate  risk  factors
in  projects introducing new  technologies.  a  possible  research
direction is  the  development  of  a  risk  assessment  framework  for
workﬂow implementations, which stresses  the  factors  to  take  into
account when  preparing  for,  implementing,  and  running  a  work-
ﬂow management system.
acknowledgements
we thank  the  following  people,  who  have  all  greatly  con-
tributed  to  setting  up  the  research  and  executing  the  study:  robbert
beesems,  rochelle  degens,  dick  van  gorcum,  mark  hage,  kees
van  hee,  harm  hoebergen,  charo  narvaez,  mariska  netjes,  oscar
ommert,  rené  theunissen,  alexander  in  ‘t  veld  and  eric  verbeek.
we  also  thank  the  anonymous  members  of  the  project  teams  who
were  interviewed  about  the  workﬂow  implementations  within
their  organizations.
appendix  a.
table  6
detailed
 numbers  for  lead  time  measurement  (**:  no  reliable  simulation  model  could  be  obtained).
lead  time  (days)  lead  time  (days)  lead  time  (days)
1a  2a  1a–2a  %  0  3  0–3  %  1b  2b  1b–2b  %
invoice  processing  15.85  11.93  −3.92  −25%  15.91  12.87  −3.04  −19%  16.46  13.09  −3.37  −20%
invoice
 processing  13.08  6.82  −6.26  −48%  13.34  11.13  −2.21  −17%  **  **  **  **
mutations
 hrm  record  8.92  5.12  −3.80  −43%  9.42  16.88  7.46  79%  6.87  16.95  10.08  147%
processing
 sick  leaves  1.49  1.36  −0.13  −9%  1.91  1.64  −0.27  −14%  3.88  1.95  −1.93  −50%
appeals
 100.00  52.00  −48.00  −48%  106.00  146.00  40.00  38%  **  **  **  **
disability
 insurance  acceptance  44.79  37.88  −6.91  −15%  45.51  11.79  −33.72  −74%  35.40  11.71  −23.69  −67%
life
 insurance  acceptance  19.97  16.32  −3.65  −18%  20.06  11.84  −8.22  −41%  30.44  11.77  −18.67  −61%
table  7
detailed
 numbers  for  waiting  time  measurement  (**:  no  reliable  simulation  model  could  be  obtained).
wait  time  (days)  wait  time  (days)  wait  time  (days)
1a 2a  1a–2a  %  0  3  0–3  %  1b  2b  1b–2b  %
invoice  processing  15.8  11.89  −3.91  −25%  15.87  12.87  −3.00  −19%  16.42  13.06  −3.36  −20%
invoice
 processing  13.04  6.79  −6.25  −48%  13.29  11.07  −2.22  −17%  **  **  **  **
mutations
 hrm  record  8.86  5.07  −3.79  −43%  9.37  16.87  7.50  80%  6.81  16.94  10.13  149%
processing
 sick  leaves  1.46  1.34  −0.12  −8%  1.88  1.62  −0.26  −14%  3.83  1.92  −1.91  −50%
appeals
 97  49  −48.00  −49%  103.00  145.00  42.00  41%  **  **  **  **
disability
 insurance  acceptance  44.65  37.73  −6.92  −15%  45.37  11.68  −33.69  −74%  35.28  11.6  −23.68  −67%
life
 insurance  acceptance  19.89  16.24  −3.65  −18%  19.98  11.77  −8.21  −41%  30.33  11.7  −18.63  −61%140  h.a.  reijers  et  al.  /  international  journal  of  information  management  36  (2016)  126–141
table 8
detailed
 numbers  for  service  time  measurement  (**:  no  reliable  simulation  model  could  be  obtained).
service  time  (minutes)  service  time  (minutes)  service  time  (minutes)
1a  2a  1a–2a  %  0  3  0–3  %  1b  2b  1b–2b  %
invoice  processing  17.80  17.40  −0.40  −2%  17.75  14.44  −3.31  −19%  19.41  14.41  −5.00  −26%
invoice
 processing  19.45  13.21  −6.24  −32%  19.60  24.23  4.63  24%  **  24.21  **  **
mutations
 hrm  record  24.91  20.97  −3.94  −16%  22.86  5.66  −17.20  −75%  24.95  5.71  −19.24  −77%
processing
 sick leaves 13.69  10.72 −2.97 −22%  13.99  7.21  −6.78  −48%  13.79  7.23  −6.56  −48%
appeals 24.20 22.70  −1.50  −6%  24.50  12.60  −11.90  −49%  **  **  **  **
disability insurance  acceptance  60.03  63.44  3.41  6%  59.87  45.53  −14.34  −24%  52.54  45.54  −7.00  −13%
life
 insurance  acceptance  34.95  34.37  −0.58  −2%  35.01  29.48  −5.53  −16%  47.26  29.38  −17.88  −38%
table  9
detailed
 numbers  for  utilization  measurement  (*:  resource  data  was  not  available;  **:  no  reliable  simulation  model  could  be  obtained).
utilization (%)  utilization  (%)  utilization  (%)
1a  2a  1a–2a  %  0  3  0–3  %  1b  2b  1b–2b  %
invoice  processing  0.0903  0.0947  0.0044  5%  0.0947  0.0676  −0.0271  −29%  0.1245  0.0719  −0.0526  −42%
invoice processing  0.4320  0.2826  −0.1494  −35%  0.4364  0.5504  0.1140  26%  **  **  **  **
mutations
 hrm  record  0.2300  0.2000  −0.0300  −13%  0.2100  0.0400  −0.1700  −81%  0.1600  0.0100  −0.1500  −94%
processing
 sick  leaves  0.7100  0.5400  −0.1700  −24%  0.6800  0.2850  −0.3950  −58%  0.8640  0.2790  −0.5850  −68%
appeals
 0.6544  0.5592  −0.0952  −15%  0.6618  *  *  *  **  **  **  **
disability
 insurance acceptance 0.2264  0.2393 0.0129 6%  0.2206  0.1430  −0.0776  −35%  0.2045  0.1416  −0.0629  −31%
life insurance  acceptance  0.3319  0.3270  −0.0049  −1%  0.3258  0.3098  −0.0160  −5%  0.5460  0.3205  −0.2255  −41%
references
atkinson, d.,  &  lam,  a.  (1999).  a  case  study  exploration  of  groupware  supported
workﬂow.  proceedings  of  australasian  conference  on  information  systems  (acis) ,
30–41. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.3.
2568&rep=rep1&type=pdf
berger,  m.,  ellmer,  e.,  quirchmayr,  g.,  &  zeitlinger,  a.  (1997).  evaluating  workﬂow
management  systems  and  information  systems  department  of  business
organization. in proceedings of the 8th  international  workshop  on  database  and
expert systems applications  ieee  computer  society.
bowers,  j.,  button,  g.,  &  sharrock,  w.  (1995).  workﬂow  from  within  and  without:
technology  and  cooperative  work  on  the  print  industry  shopﬂoor.  in
proceedings of the fourth  european  conference  on  computer-supported
cooperative  work kluwer  academic  publishers,  (pp.  51–66).
brahe,  s.,  &  schmidt,  k.  (2007).  the  story  of  a  working  workﬂow  management
system. in  proceedings  of  the  2007  international  acm  conference  on  supporting
group work acm new york,  ny,  usa,  (pp.  249–258).  http://dl.acm.org/citation.
cfm?id=1316661
choenni,  s.,  bakker,  r.,  &  baets,  w.  (2003).  on  the  evaluation  of  workﬂow  systems
in  business  processes.  proceedings  of  the  10th  european  conference  on
information systems evaluation , http://www.semgrid.net/citation-before-2006.
1/++issue2-art5-choenni.pdf
doherty,  &  perry.  (2001).  the  cultural  impact  of  workﬂow  management  systems  in
the  ﬁnancial  services  sector.  service  industries  journal ,  (august),  37–41,
dx.doi.opg/10.1080/714005046.
dourish, p.  (2001).  process  descriptions  as  organisational  accounting  devices:  the
dual use  of  workﬂow  technologies,  52–60.
dumas,  m.,  van  der  aalst,  w.  m.,  &  ter  hofstede,  a.  h.  (2005).  .  process-aware
information systems: bridging  people  and  software  through  process  technology.
society for  information  science  and  technology  (58)  wiley.,  doi:  10.1002/asi,  427.
georgakopoulos,  d.,  hornick,  m.,  &  sheth,  a.  (1995).  an  overview  of  workﬂow
management:  from  process  modeling  to  workﬂow  automation  infrastructure.
distributed  and  parallel  databases ,  3(2),  119–153.
goebl,  w.,  messner,  k.  j.,  schwarzer,  b.,  &  ag,  g.  s.  (2001).  experiences  in
introducing  workﬂow  management  in  a  large  insurance  group,  00(c),  1–9.
gruber,  h.  (2009).  evaluation  of  workﬂow  management  systems.  ieee  conference
on  commerce  and  enterprise  computing ,  307–311.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
cec.2009.33
gruber,  h.,  &  huemer,  c.  (2009).  proﬁtability  analysis  of  workﬂow  management
systems.  2009  ieee  conference  on  commerce  and  enterprise  computing ,  233–238.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/cec.2009.34
halsted, m., & froehle,  c.  (2008).  design,  implementation,  and  assessment  of  a
radiology
 workﬂow  management  system.  american  journal  of  roentgenology ,
191 (2),  321–327.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2214/ajr.07.3122
hammer,  m.  (1990).  reengineering  work:  don’t  automate,  obliterate.  harvard
business  review ,  68(4),  104–112.
herrmann, t.,  &  hoffmann,  m.  (2005).  the  metamorphoses  of  workﬂow  projects  in
their  early  stages.  computer  supported  cooperative  work  (cscw ,  14(5),
399–432.
jablonski,  s.,  &  bussler,  c.  (1996).  workﬂow  management:  modeling  concepts,
architecture,  and  implementation .  london:  international  thomson  computer
pres.
kueng,  p.  (1998).  impact  of  workﬂow  systems  on  people,  task  and  structure:  a
post-implementation evaluation.  in  d.  brown,  &  a.  remenyi  (eds.).  proceedingsof  the  ﬁfth  european  conference  on  the  evaluation  of  information  technology ,
67–75.
kueng, p.  (2000).  the  effects  of  workﬂow  systems  on  organizations.  a  qualitative
study ,  1,  301–316,  1998.
küng,  p.,  &  hagen,  c.  (2007).  the  fruits  of  business  process  management:  an
experience  report  from  a  swiss  bank.  business  process  management  journal ,
13(4), 477–487. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/14637150710763522
law,  a.,  &  kelton,  d.  (1991).  simulation  modeling  and  analysis .  new  york:
mcgraw-hill.
li,  m.-f.,  tsai,  j.  c.,  chen,  w.-j.,  lin,  h.-s.,  pan,  h.-b.,  &  yang,  t.-l.  (2013).  redeﬁning
the sonography workﬂow  through  the  application  of  a  departmental
computerized  workﬂow  management  system.  international  journal  of  medical
informatics ,  82(3),  168–176.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2012.06.001
mans,  r.  s.,  russell,  n.  c.,  van  der  aalst,  w.,  bakker,  p.  j.  m.,  &  moleman,  a.  j.  (2010).
simulation to analyze  the  impact  of  a  schedule-aware  workﬂow  management
system.  simulation ,  86(8-9),  519–541.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
0037549709358899
markus,  m.  l.,  &  robey,  d.  (1998).  business  process  reengineering  and  the  role  of
the information systems professional.  business  process  reengineering:  a
strategic  approach , 6,  591–611.
mutschler, b.  (2006).  an  evaluation  approach  for  analyzing  workﬂow  management
systems  from  a  value-based  perspective.  10th  ieee  international  enterprise
distributed object computing  conference  (edoc  ’06) ,  477–482.  http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/xpls/abs all.jsp?arnumber=4031244
mutschler,  b.,  reichert,  m.,  &  bumiller,  j.  (2008).  unleashing  the  effectiveness  of
process-oriented  information  systems:  problem  analysis,  critical  success
factors, and  implications.  ieee  transactions  on  systems,  man,  and  cybernetics,
part  c  (applications  and  reviews) ,  38(3),  280–291.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
tsmcc.2008.919197
mutschler,  b.,  rijpkema,  m.,  &  reichert,  m.  (2007).  investigating  implemented
process design: a case  study  on  the  impact  of  process-aware  information
systems
 on  core  job  dimensions.  workshops  and  doctoral  consortium  of  the  19th
international  conference  on  advanced  information  systems  engineering ,  2–6.
http://dbis.eprints.uni-ulm.de/214/
oba,  m.,  onoda,  s.,  &  komoda,  n.  (2000).  evaluating  the  quantitative  effects  of
workﬂow systems  based  on  real  cases.  proceedings  of  the  33rd  annual  hawaii
international  conference  on  system  science ,  1–7.  http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/
abs  all.jsp?arnumber=926852
pallas  athena.  (1997).  protos  user  manual .  plasmolen:  pallas  athena  bv.
pantazi,  m.-a.  a.,  &  georgopoulos,  n.  b.  (2006).  investigating  the  impact  of
business-process-competent  information  systems  (iss)  on  business
performance.  managing  service  quality ,  16(4),  421–434.  http://dx.doi.org/10.
1108/09604520610675739
parkes, a. (2002). critical  success  factors  in  workﬂow  implementation.  proc.  6th
paciﬁc asia  conference  on  information  systems  (pacis’02) ,  363–380.  http://
scholar.google.com/  scholar?hl=en&btng=search&q=intitle:critical+
success+factors+in+workﬂow+implementation#2
poelmans, s., & reijers, h. (2009).  assessing  workﬂow  management  systems:  a
quantitative
 analysis  of  a  worfklow  evaluation  model.  proceedings  of  the  11th
international  conference  on  enterprise  information  systems ,
183–189.
poelmans, s.,  reijers,  h.  a.,  &  recker,  j.  (2013).  investigating  the  success  of
operational business  process  management  systems.  information  technology  and
management , 14(4),  295–314.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10799-013-0167-8h.a.  reijers  et  al.  /  international  journal  of  information  management  36  (2016)  126–141  141
prinz,  w.,  &  kolvenbach,  s.  (1996).  support  for  workﬂows  in  a  ministerial
environment.  proceedings  of  the  1996  acm  conference  on  computer  supported
cooperative  work ,  199–208.  http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=240254
ravesteyn, p.  (2007).  a  study  into  the  critical  success  factors  when  implementing
business  process  management  systems.  in  proceedings  of  the  irma  2007
conference  idea  group  inc.,  (pp.  1291–1293).
ravesteyn,  p.,  &  batenburg,  r.  (2010).  surveying  the  critical  success  factors  of
bpm-systems  implementation. business process  management  journal ,  16(3),
492–507. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/14637151011049467
reijers,  h.  (2004).  performance improvement by  workﬂow  management  systems:
preliminary results  from  an  empirical  study.  in  proceedings  of  the  6th
international conference on  enterprise  information  systems (iceis) insticc,  (pp.
359–366). http://scholar.google.com/  scholar?hl=en&btng=search&q=intitle:
performance+improvement+by+workﬂow+management+systems+-+preliminary+results+from+an+empirical+study#0
reijers, h., &  heusinkveld,  h. (2004). business process management:  attempted
concepticide?
 in  proceedings  of  the  14th  information  resources  management
conference  (irma  2004) irma, (pp.  128–131). http://dare.ubn.kun.nl/handle/
2066/67198
reijers, h.,  &  poelmans,  s.  (2007).  re-conﬁguring  workﬂow  management  systems
to  facilitate  a  smooth  ﬂow  of  work.  international  journal  of  cooperative
information  systems ,  16(02),  155–175.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/
s0218843007001615
reijers, h.,  &  van  der  aalst,  w.  m.  p.  (2005).  the  effectiveness  of  workﬂow
management  systems:  predictions  and  lessons  learned.  international  journal  of
information  management ,  25(5),  458–472.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijinfomgt.2005.06.008
sarmento, a.,  &  machado,  a.  (2000).  impact  evaluation  of  organisational  changes
enabled  by  workﬂow  systems.  in  sixth  international  workshop  on  groupware
ieee,  (pp.  134–137).  http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs  all.
jsp?arnumber=885165
schael, t., &  zeller,  b.  (1993).  workﬂow  management  systems  for  ﬁnancial  services.
in  proceedings  of  the  conference  on  organizational  computing  systems  acm  new
york,  ny,  usa,  (pp.  142–153).  http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=168569
schmidt,  j.,  meetz,  k.,  &  wendler,  t.  (1999).  workﬂow  management  systems—a
powerful means to integrate  radiologic  processes  and  application  systems.
journal of  digital  imaging ,  12(2  (suppl.  1)),  214–5.
sharma,  r.,  &  yetton,  p.  (2003).  the  contingent  effects  of  management  support  and
task  interdependence  on  successful  information  systems  implementation.  mis
quarterly , 27(4),  533–556.
strong,  d.  m.,  &  volkoff,  o.  (2004).  a  roadmap  for  enterprise  system
implementation.  ieee.  computer ,  37(6),  22–29.trkman,  p.  (2010).  the  critical  success  factors  of  business  process  management.
international  journal  of  information  management ,  30(2),  125–134.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2009.07.003
van der  aalst,  w.  m.  p.  (2011).  process  mining:  discovery,  conformance  and
enhancement  of  business  processes .  berlin:  springer.
van  der  aalst,  w.  m.  p.,  de  crom,  p.  j.  n.,  goverde,  r.  r.  h.  m.  j.,  van  hee,  k.  m.,
hofman,  w.  j.,  reijers,  h.  a.,  et  al.  (2000).  exspect  6.4:  an  executable
speciﬁcation  tool for hierarchical  colored  petri  nets.  in  m.  nielsen,  &  d.
simpson (eds.),  application  and  theory  of  petri  nets  2000.  lecture  notes  in
computer science  (vol.  1825) (pp. 455–464).  berlin:  springer-verlag.
van  der  aalst,  w.  m.  p.,  reijers,  h.  a.,  weijters,  a.  j.,  van  dongen,  b.  f.,  alves  de
medeiros, a. k.,  song,  m.,  et al. (2007).  business  process  mining:  an  industrial
application. information  systems ,  32(5),  713–732.
van  der  aalst, w. m.  p.,  & van hee,  k.  m.  (2004).  workﬂow  management:  models,
methods,
 and  systems .  mit  press.
van hee, k.  m.,  somers, l. j., & voorhoeve,  m.  (1989).  executable  speciﬁcations  for
distributed
 information  systems.  in  proceedings  of  the  ifip  tc  8/wg  8.1  working
conference  on  information system concepts:  an  in-depth analysis elsevier science,
(pp.
 139–156).
vanderfeesten, i.,  &  reijers,  h.  (2005).  a  human-oriented  tuning  of  workﬂow
management  systems.  in  proceedings  of  the  business  process  management
conference,  lecture  notes  in  computer  science,  vol.  3649 .  berlin/heidelberg:
springer.  http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/11538394  6
vanderfeesten, i.,  &  reijers,  h.  a.  (2014).  the  impact  of  worﬂow  systems  on
organizations  (no.  xxx)  (pp.  1–15).  see  http://www.win.tue.nl/ ∼hreijers/h.a.
%20reijers%20bestanden/tronline.pdf .
von  brocke,  j.,  &  rosemann,  m.  (2010).  handbook  on  business  process  management
1. berlin/heidelberg:  springer.
weske, m.  (2007).  business  process  management:  concepts,  languages,  architectures .
berlin:  springer.
wintergreen. (2012).  bpm:  market  shares,  strategy,  and  forecasts,  worldwide,
2012–2018 . lexington:  wintergreen  research.
yang,  h.  c.  (2011).  business  process  reengineering  based  on  workﬂow  technology.
key  engineering  materials ,  474 ,  1500–1506.
yin,  r.  k.  (2009).  case  study  research:  design  and  methods .  sage.,  p.  219
zur muehlen, m. (1999).  evaluation  of  workﬂow  management  systems  using  meta
models. proceedings  of  the  32nd  hawaii  international  conferenc ,  1–11.  http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs  all.jsp?arnumber=772961
zur  muehlen,  m.  (2004).  workﬂow-based  process  controlling:  foundation,  design,  and
application of workﬂow-driven  process  information  systems .  berlin:  logos.