business & information systems engineering manuscript no.
(will be inserted by the editor)
business process management
don't forget to improve the process!
wil m.p. van der aalst marcello
la rosa fl avia maria santoro
received: date / accepted: date
abstract business process management (bpm) is the discipline that com-
bines knowledge from information technology, management sciences and indus-
trial engineering, with the goal of improving business processes. the discipline
builds upon earlier work on oce automation, workow management, opera-
tions research, lean manufacturing, six sigma and business process reengineer-
ing. although the value of \process thinking" is widely acknowledged and most
organizations document their processes one way or another, more sophisticated
bpm techniques and technologies failed to become widely adopted. this spe-
cial issue of bise on bpm use cases aims to provide an overview of the bpm
discipline and reect on its development. to set the scene, we provide a short
history of bpm followed by a critical analysis of the current state of the art.
we will argue that the, sometimes excessive, focus on process models does
not always yield better business processes. the central question addressed in
this paper is \how can bpm contribute to better processes rather than better
models?"
keywords business process management key performance indicators 
process mining process modeling six sigma operations research
wil m.p. van der aalst
department of mathematics and computer science (mf 7.103), eindhoven university of
technology, po box 513, 5600 mb eindhoven, the netherlands.
tel.: +31 40 2474295
e-mail: w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tue.nl
marcello la rosa
bpm discipline, is school, queensland university of technology, gpo box 2434, brisbane,
qld 4001, australia & nicta queensland research lab, 70-72 bowen st spring hill,
brisbane qld 4000
e-mail: m.larosa@qut.edu.au
fl avia maria santoro
departamento de inform atica aplicada, universidade federal do estado, do rio de janeiro,
avenida pasteur, 458 urca, 22245-040 rio de janeiro, rj, brazil.
e-mail: avia.santoro@uniriotec.br2 wil m.p. van der aalst et al.
1 introduction
over de last decade business process management (bpm) has become a ma-
ture discipline, with a well-established set of principles, methods and tools
that combine knowledge from information technology, management sciences
and industrial engineering with the purpose of improving business processes
[aalst, 2004,weske, 2007,aalst, 2013,dumas et al., 2013]. the successful in-
ternational bpm conference series ( http://bpm-conference.org ) shows that
there is a stable scientic core and substantial progress in specic bpm areas.
examples of bpm areas where remarkable progress has been made include:
{the syntactic verication of complex business process models before
putting them into production, to avoid potentially costly mistakes.
{the systematic identication of typical process behaviours based on scien-
tic insights provided by the workow patterns initiative.1
{the automatic creation of congurable process models from a collection
of process model variants, used to guide analysts in selecting the right
conguration.
{the automatic execution of business process models based on a rigorously-
dened semantics, and through a variety of bpm systems.
{the adaptation of processes on-the-y and the evaluation of the impact of
their changes, in order to react to (unexpected) exceptions.
{the automatic discovery of process models from raw event data produced
by common information systems found in organizations.
looking at the evolution of the bpm conference series one can conclude that
some of the scientic problems have been successfully solved and (partly)
adopted in practice.
bpm is a broad discipline. hence, numerous bpm papers can be found
in broader conferences such as the international conference on information
systems (icis), the european conference on information systems (ecis),
the international conference on advanced information systems engineer-
ing (caise), the international conference on cooperative information sys-
tems (coopis), the international conference on business information systems
(bis) and business process modeling, development, and support (bpmds),
as well as a number of scientic journals. there is also signicant interest
from practitioners. large organizations model their processes in languages like
bpmn (business process model and notation) and have programs related to
process improvement. nowadays, one could argue that the \process thinking"
mindset is common in most organizations.
despite the attention for bpm in academia and industry, there is a consid-
erable gap between (1) the state-of-the-art bpm technologies and approaches
and (2) the actual use and needs of bpm practitioners. for example, only few
organizations use bpm systems to automatically execute their operational
processes. in many cases, processes are hard-coded in applications (e.g., erp
systems like sap or home-grown systems). of course, bpm does not imply
1http://workflowpatterns.combusiness process management 3
the use of bpm systems . business processes need to be managed in environ-
ments where processes are only partly documented and a range of information
systems is used. these systems or often unaware of the processes in which they
are used.
in this paper, we reect on the current state of bpm and what could be
done to bridge the gap between bpm research and practical use of bpm tech-
nologies. we argue that in bpm research there has been, often, an excessive
focus on specic artefacts (like process models). however, better models do
not automatically yield better business processes . hence, research should bet-
ter align to the original goal of bpm of improving business processes, rather
than improving process models { an observation also made by marlon dumas
in his recent keynote speech at bpm'15 [dumas, 2015].
key performance indicators (kpis) related to common process perfor-
mance dimensions such as time, quality, costs and compliance are often men-
tioned in research on process improvement, but it is often unclear how research
results and related bpm technology concretely contribute to better kpis. at
the same time, many good ideas are not adopted: they are not implemented
in the information systems people actually use. moreover, organizational re-
sistance may provide major roadblocks to the successful execution of bpm
initiatives.
accordingly, the remainder of the paper is organized as follows. section 2
provides a very brief history of bpm. in section 3, we identify the goal of bpm
(better processes rather than better models). section 4 highlights directions
that may help to bridge the gap identied. section 5 overviews the papers
contained in this special issue and section 6 concludes this paper.
2 a brief history of bpm
since the rst industrial revolution, productivity has been increasing because
of technical innovations, improvements in the organization of work, and the use
of information technology. during the rst industrial revolution (1784-1870)
machines (e.g., driven by water and steam power) entered the workplace. the
second industrial revolution (1870-1969) was based on mass production, the di-
vision of labor, and the use of electrical energy. the third industrial revolution
(1869-2015) was driven by the availability of computers, networks and other
it systems. today, people talk about \industry 4.0" [hermann et al., 2015] as
the fourth industrial revolution. the goal is to create \smart" manufacturing
systems using a combination of embedded systems, sensors, networks, service
orientation, big data and analytics.
although the above four industrial revolutions are often associated with
factories and physical production systems, they also apply to administrative
processes and services. governmental agencies, banks, insurance companies,
etc. can be seen as \administrative factories". the division of labor (i.e.,
specialization), the economies of scales and experience eects, and comput-
erization, radically changed these administrative processes. in such modern4 wil m.p. van der aalst et al.
\production processes", the product is often information provisioned through
a service, rather than a physical entity. bpm should be viewed in this context.
the early workow management (wfm) systems were clearly inspired by pro-
duction processes in the manufacturing industry. the term \straight-through
processing" (stp) refers to the desire to fully automate processes without any
human involvement, like a fully-automated assembly line to produce cars.
through wfm systems, business process automation resonated well in or-
ganizations heavily investing in business process reengineering (bpr) in the
nineties [hammer & champy, 1993]. as a result, there was an explosion of
commercial wfm systems that started around 1995 (cf. systems like staware,
cosa and ibm mq series workow). however, the roots of such systems
can already be found in the late seventies. at that time people like skip ellis,
anatol holt and michael zisman worked on oce information (oi) systems
driven by explicit process models [aalst, 2013]. oi systems like ocetalk and
scoop used petri nets to model and enact operational processes. these sys-
tems and also the later wfm systems did not pay much attention to manage-
ment aspects. moreover, they were typically very restrictive, straight-jacketing
processes into some structured and \idealized" process.
bpm can be seen as an evolution of the concept of wfm [aalst, 2013].
wfm primarily focuses on the automation of business processes, whereas bpm
has a broader scope: from process automation and process analysis to opera-
tions management and the organization of work. on the one hand, bpm aims
to improve business processes, possibly without the use of new technologies.
for example, by modeling a business process and analyzing it using simu-
lation, management may get ideas on how to reduce costs while improving
service levels. on the other hand, bpm is often associated with software to
manage, control and support operational processes. this gave rise to a new
type of technology, called bpm systems , which can connect with a variety of
(legacy) systems as well as emerging technology (e.g. cloud networks, mobile
devices), and eectively replaced their predecessors, the wfm systems.
this short discussion on the history of bpm shows that there is a trend
from automating processes (oi and wfm systems) to managing processes
(bpm). however, the majority of existing bpm research approaches still seems
to be based on the assumptions used by wfm and the early oi systems.
process management turned out to be much more \thorny" than envisioned
by the pioneers in the eld.
3 what denes a better process?
the lion's share of bpm and wfm literature seems to focus on process models .
the control-ow perspective (modeling the ordering of activities) is often the
backbone of such models. other perspectives such as the resource perspective
(modeling roles, organizational units, authorizations, etc.), the data perspective
(modeling decisions, data creation, forms, etc.), the time perspective (modeling
durations, deadlines, etc.), and the function perspective (describing activitiesbusiness process management 5
and related applications) are often mentioned, but receive less attention. there
is the belief that better (control-ow) models will lead to better processes. we
dare to question this belief for several reasons. first of all, the process mod-
els used for performance analysis may not resemble reality. they are mainly
informed by those who participate in the process (the process participants ),
through workshops or interviews, and as such may be subject to their knowl-
edge bias and inuenced by norms and expectations of the organization. they
may describe an idealized or particular situation and thus are often not useful
to provide the insights needed [aalst, 2011]. second, these conceptual models
are rarely used for enactment. few organizations actually use bpm technol-
ogy to run their processes. most resort to customer-made or standard software
where processes are hard-coded or not supported at all. there is no indica-
tion that this will change dramatically in the near future. despite all work on
exibility [reichert & weber, 2012], bpm systems are still perceived as being
too restrictive. bpm systems are also costly. therefore, we argue that a fo-
cus on automation will not help to bridge the gap mentioned earlier. process
models are only helpful if they actually help to improve processes. for exam-
ple, verifying the absence of deadlocks in models is a prerequisite for process
automation. however, models that are sound but at the same time not used
to congure a bpm system do not improve performance. even if they would
be used for enactment, they would not necessarily lead to better processes
just because they are deadlock-free. a sound process model may still cause
unnecessary bottlenecks and rework.
therefore, we advocate a focus on the process rather than on its model .
this does not mean that process models should be abandoned, but rather that
they should be created having a clear purpose in mind. for example, while it
makes sense to have a very detailed process model if the purpose is automation,
this level of sophistication, which clearly comes at a cost, is not justied if the
purpose of the model is to identify redesign opportunities aimed at reducing
waste. for this, a high-level process model would be enough, so long as it
is possible to distinguish value-adding from non-value-adding or redundant
activities. in fact, the perspectives of a process model one should focus on,
and their level of detail, should be determined by the strategic objective of
the bpm project at hand (e.g. increasing operational eciency rather than
outsmarting competitors).
abetter process is thus one that better contributes to meeting the strate-
gic objectives of an organization. when the level of contribution is not as
expected, bpm projects are started to improve business process performance.
to measure process improvements we can use various key performance indi-
cators (kpis). these kpis, also known as process performance measures , are
quantities that can be unambiguously determined for a given business pro-
cess, assuming that the data to calculate this performance measure is available
[dumas et al., 2013]. they are dened over performance dimensions such as
time, quality, cost, exibility, etc. for example, we can measure time using
cycle time ,waiting time ornon-value adding time ; cost using cost per execu-
tion,resource utilization and waste ; and quality using customer satisfaction ,6 wil m.p. van der aalst et al.
errors rate andsla violations . some kpis can be measured quite easily, such
as cycle time. others may be more dicult and time-consuming to quantify,
e.g. customer satisfaction may require aggregating data coming from customer
experience surveys, product evaluations, loyalty analyses, etc.
the choice of which kpis to measure should reect the strategic objectives
of the organization. for example, time- and cost-related kpis are typically
measured when the objective is to increase operational eciency, while quality
may be used when the objective is to increase market penetration. kpis must
be associated with target values , e.g. the cycle time of a claim handling process
must not exceed 5 working days, from the time the claim is lodged to the time
it is approved or rejected. these targets should be determined in line with the
strategic plan of an organization.
after identifying the kpis, one still needs to answer the question \how to
improve the process in terms of its kpis?", i.e. how to improve the process
kpis in order for these to meet the envisaged targets. two possible research
directions are discussed next.
4 how can bpm contribute to better processes?
one promising direction to better link bpm to the concrete improvement of
process kpis lies in exploiting event data present in the organization. for
example, six sigma [pyzdek, 2003] has for long applied statistical analysis
tools to organizational data in order to measure and reduce the degree of
business process variability. the idea is to identify and remove the causes for
such variability, e.g. in terms of errors, defects or sla violations in the output
of business processes, and to control that such processes eectively perform
within the desired performance targets (e.g. ensuring that there are no more
than 10 slas per month). however, while six sigma is focused on improving
business processes by statistically quantifying process performance changes,
the data used for such analyses is typically collected manually, e.g. through
surveys or observation. this makes the employment of such techniques, when
carried out properly, very costly and time consuming. moreover, six sigma
rarely looks inside end-to-end processes. the focus is on a specic step in the
process or on aggregate measures.
this problem can be obviated through the use of techniques that automat-
ically extract process knowledge from event data logged by common informa-
tion systems, e.g. erp or ticketing systems. in this context, process mining
[aalst, 2011] has emerged as a range of methods and tools for exploiting such
data to automatically discover a process model, or check its compliance with
existing reference models or norms, or to determine the causes for process devi-
ations or variants. the advantage of relying on logged data as opposed to data
that has been collected manually is that any insight extracted from this data
is based on evidence, rather than on human condence, and thus is a more
accurate representation of reality. moreover, the artefacts extracted through
process mining, e.g. process models, can be enhanced with (live) process perfor-business process management 7
mance information such as statistics on activity duration and resource utiliza-
tion. this allows organizations to look inside end-to-end processes. for these
reasons, process mining methods are now being used across all phases of the
bpm lifecycle, from discovery through to monitoring. however, while a wide
range of techniques have been developed in this eld, the research community
has mostly devoted its attention to the quality of the artefacts produced (e.g.
the accuracy of the process models extracted from the logs), rather than to
improving the actual processes for which such logs are available.
therefore, a possible research direction is to bridge the current gap between
process mining and six sigma. for instance, process mining techniques could
be used to extract detailed and accurate process performance measurements
(e.g. in the form of process models enhanced with performance statistics) on
top of which six sigma techniques could be applied to pinpoint causes for
variability, and to identify and evaluate the impact of dierent process changes
on the process kpis.
another avenue to obtain better processes consists in applying tech-
niques from operations research to the realm of business processes. oper-
ations research (or) is a well-established research area that aims to solve
complex decision-making problems by employing a variety of mathematical
techniques, such as simulation, queuing theory, optimization and statistics
[moder & elmaghraby, 1978]. many process improvement problems can in fact
be traced back into typical problems investigated by or, since there are typ-
ically a number of constraints and options making it hard to nd optimal
solutions. in a way, the goal is to optimize a process according to given kpis
(typically time and resources usage). for example, or techniques can be used
to minimize cycle time by determining the optimal execution order of process
activities, or to minimize process costs by determining the optimal assign-
ment of process activities to participants. the value of linking operations
research and bpm was rst realized by john buzacott, who advocated the
use of queuing theory to evaluate the conditions under which radical pro-
cess changes in the context of bpr initiatives are likely to be appropriate
[buzacott, 1996]. more recently, or techniques have been applied to resolve
resource contention issues in business processes [mandelbaum & zeltyn, 2013,
senderovich et al., 2014] or to identify an optimal allocation of human re-
sources to process activities in order to minimize risk [conforti et al., 2015].
however, barring these few exceptions, or techniques have not been system-
atically applied to solve process improvement problems, yet.
5 in this special issue
the twenty bpm use cases described in [aalst, 2013] were an initial attempt
to structure the bpm discipline, by identifying \how, where and when" bpm
techniques can be used. these use cases were also used to categorize all papers
published in the bpm conference.8 wil m.p. van der aalst et al.
following from the work in [aalst, 2013], this special issue aims to further
structure the bpm discipline and show some recent developments. specically,
the bpm use cases served as a starting point for the call-for-papers, which
attracted papers covering the whole bpm lifecycle. after a careful reviewing
process, six papers were selected, which are briey described below.
{the paper \the state-of-the-art of business process management re-
search as published in the bpm conference: recommendations for pro-
gressing the field", by jan recker and jan mendling, reports on a detailed
analysis of the contributions of the bpm conference series, focusing on the
research methods adopted, the type of contribution, and the impact gener-
ated. from this, the authors distill some research directions to consolidate
and further develop the bpm discipline.
{fredrik milani, marlon dumas, raimundas matulevicius, naved ahmed
and silva kasela, in their paper \criteria and heuristics for business pro-
cess model decomposition: review and comparative evaluation", empiri-
cally evaluate dierent types of heuristics for decomposing process models,
in view of increasing model understandability and maintainability. here,
the perspective taken is not that of proposing yet another technique for
process model decomposition, but rather that of assessing the relative
strengths of existing techniques.
{the paper \mixed-paradigm process modeling with intertwined state
spaces" by johannes de smedt, jochen de weerdt, jan vanthienen and
geert poels, contributes a stepwise approach to blend, for the rst time,
the procedural and declarative paradigms for business process modeling.
in doing so, the paper attempts to nd a trade o between the strengths
and disadvantages of both paradigms, by performing an in-depth study of
the scenarios where such mixed paradigm is useful.
{martin berner, jino augustine and alexander maedche, in \the impact
of process visibility on process performance: a multiple case study of
operations control centers in itsm", empirically evaluate the benets of
monitoring critical business processes in the context of operations con-
trol centers for it service management (itsm). this multiple case study
measures the impact of process visibility (obtained through monitoring)
on improving process performance, and determines its mediating factors.
{in their paper \the use of process mining for business process simulation:
structuring the eld", niels martin, beno^ t depaire and an caris study
how existing process mining techniques can be used to increase the relia-
bility of various aspects of a business process simulation model, through
information extracted from event data. this study distils a number of re-
search challenges still to be addressed in order to bridge the gap between
these two areas of bpm.
{the paper \methodological support for business process redesign: a frame-
work and critical evaluation of the state-of-the-art", by rob vanwersch,
khurram shahzad, irene vanderfeesten, kris vanhaecht, paul grefen, lil-
iane pintelon, jan mendling, frits van merode and hajo reijers, providesbusiness process management 9
a systematic review of approaches for business process improvement. this
review leads to a classication framework aiming to support analysts in
determining which approach is most suited for their specic improvement
needs.
the special issue concludes with an interview by marcello la rosa to
michael rosemann on the role of bpm in modern organizations.
6 conclusion
in this paper we stressed the importance of bpm research to focus on improv-
ing business processes rather than improving the artefacts produced by bpm
techniques and tools, such as process models. we did so by reecting on the
contributions of the bpm research community, followed by a short history of
the bpm discipline, to highlight, among others, its roots in oce information
and workow management systems. next, we dened what it means to build
better processes in terms of process performance, as captured by kpis and
their target values. finally, we sketched two possible research directions for
bringing bpm research closer to the original bpm goal of process improve-
ment, and concluded with an overview of the papers present in this special
issue.
references
[aalst, 2004] aalst, w.m.p. van der 2004. business process management demystied: a
tutorial on models, systems and standards for workow management. in desel, j.,
w. reisig, & g. rozenberg (eds), lectures on concurrency and petri nets, volume 3098
oflecture notes in computer science , pages 1{65. springer-verlag, berlin.
[aalst, 2011] aalst, w.m.p. van der 2011. process mining: discovery, conformance and
enhancement of business processes. springer-verlag, berlin.
[aalst, 2013] aalst, w.m.p. van der 2013. business process management: a comprehensive
survey. isrn software engineering, pages 1{37. doi:10.1155/2013/507984.
[buzacott, 1996] buzacott, j.a. 1996. commonalities in reengineered business processes:
models and issues. management science, 42(5):768{782.
[conforti et al., 2015] conforti, r., m. de leoni, m. la rosa, w.m.p. van der aalst, &
a.h.m. ter hofstede 2015. a recommendation system for predicting risks across multiple
business process instances. decision support systems, 69.
[dumas, 2015] dumas, m. 2015. from models to data and back: the journey of the bpm
discipline and the tangled road to bpm 2020. in proceedings of the 13th international
conference on business process management, number 9253 in lecture notes in computer
science. springer.
[dumas et al., 2013] dumas, m., m. la rosa, j. mendling, & h. reijers 2013. fundamentals
of business process management. springer-verlag, berlin.
[hammer & champy, 1993] hammer, m., & j. champy 1993. reengineering the corpora-
tion. nicolas brealey publishing, london.
[hermann et al., 2015] hermann, m., t. pentek, & b. otto 2015. design principles for
industrie 4.0 scenarios: a literature review. technical report 1, technical university of
dortmund and audi.
[mandelbaum & zeltyn, 2013] mandelbaum, a., & s. zeltyn 2013. data-stories about
(im)patient customers in tele-queues. queueing systems, 75(2-4):115{146.10 wil m.p. van der aalst et al.
[moder & elmaghraby, 1978] moder, j.j., & s.e. elmaghraby 1978. handbook of opera-
tions research: foundations and fundamentals. van nostrand reinhold, new york.
[pyzdek, 2003] pyzdek, t. 2003. the six sigma handbook: a complete guide for green
belts, black belts, and managers at all levels. mcgraw hill, new york.
[reichert & weber, 2012] reichert, m., & b. weber 2012. enabling flexibility in process-
aware information systems: challenges, methods, technologies. springer-verlag, berlin.
[senderovich et al., 2014] senderovich, a., m. weidlich, a. gal, & a. mandelbaum 2014.
queue mining: predicting delays in service processes. in jarke, m. (ed), international
conference on advanced information systems engineering (caise 2014), volume 8484 of
lecture notes in computer science , pages 42{57. springer-verlag, berlin.
[weske, 2007] weske, m. 2007. business process management: concepts, languages, ar-
chitectures. springer-verlag, berlin.