composite state machine miner
van eck, m.l.; sidorova, n.; van der aalst, w.m.p.
published in:
proceedings of the bpm demo track 2016
published: 31/01/2017
document version
publisher’s pdf, also known as version of record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
please check the document version of this publication:
• a submitted manuscript is the author's version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. there can be important differences
between the submitted version and the official published version of record. people interested in the research are advised to contact the
author for the final version of the publication, or visit the doi to the publisher's website.
• the final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• the final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page numbers.
link to publication
citation for published version (apa):
van eck, m. l., sidorova, n., & van der aalst, w. m. p. (2017). composite state machine miner: discovering and
exploring multi-perspective processes. in l. azevedo, & c. cabanillas (eds.), proceedings of the bpm demo
track 2016 (pp. 73-77). (ceur workshop proceedings; vol. 1789). ceur-ws.org.
general rights
copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            • users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            • you may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            • you may freely distribute the url identifying the publication in the public portal ?
take down policy
if you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
download date: 14. jan. 2018composite state machine miner: discovering
and exploring multi-perspective processes
maikel l. van eck?, natalia sidorova, and wil m.p. van der aalst
eindhoven university of technology, the netherlands
fm.l.v.eck,n.sidorova,w.m.p.v.d.aalst g@tue.nl
abstract. process mining provides fact-based insights into processes
based on behaviour captured in event data. an important aspect of this
is the discovery of process models from such data. traditionally, the fo-
cus of process discovery is on learning the ordering of activities. we de-
viate from this dominating activity view on processes to focus on states
and state changes. specically, we aim to discover state-based models
for processes where dierent facets, or perspectives, of the process can
be identied. in this paper we describe an interactive process discovery
tool that can be used to discover and explore state-based models for
such multi-perspective processes: the composite state machine miner .
it quanties and visualises the interactions between perspectives to pro-
vide additional process insights. this tool has been used to analyse the
bpi challenge 2012 data of a loan application process and product user
behaviour data gathered by philips during the development of a smart
baby bottle equipped with various sensors.
keywords: process discovery, state-based models, multi-perspective pro-
cesses, interactive process exploration
1 introduction
we assume that the reader is familiar with the basic concepts of process mining
and process discovery, and we refer to [1] for an in-depth overview. the goal of
most process discovery approaches is to obtain models that describe the ordering
of activities within a process. these approaches usually have an implicit notion
of the state of a process.
in this work we deviate from the dominating activity view on processes in
order to focus explicitly on process states and state changes. this state view is
more intuitive than an activity view for processes for which state information is
explicitly available. examples of such explicit state information are the diagnosis
?this research was performed in the context of the impuls collaboration project of
eindhoven university of technology and philips: \mine your own body".
copyright c2016 for this paper by its authors. copying permitted for private and
academic purposes.74 van eck et al.
of a patient in a healthcare process or the status of an order in a purchasing
process.
when studying the states of a process, that single process can have dierent
facets, or perspectives , each with their own state space. for example, consider
the homeostatic process in a person, parts of which regulate sleep and nutri-
tion. from the perspective of sleep the state of a person can be e.g. awake or
asleep, while the state of the nutrition perspective can be e.g. hungry, eating
or sated. the state of a person at any point in time is the composition of the
state of both perspectives. these perspectives have individual process cycles,
but there are interdependencies between states from dierent perspectives, e.g.
people are awake while eating. our goal is to analyse these interdependencies
between perspectives for multi-perspective state-based processes.
an approach to achieve this is described in detail in [3]. in this work we dis-
cuss the implementation of this approach: the composite state machine (csm)
miner .
2 implementation
the csm miner has been implemented as a plug-in of the prom framework [4]. it
is obtained by installing prom 6.6 or later from http://www.promtools.org/
and then using the prom package manager to instal the csmminer package.
example logs that can be used with the csm miner can be obtained from
https://svn.win.tue.nl/repos/prom/packages/csmminer/logs . there is a
screencast providing a demonstration of the main features of the miner at:
https://svn.win.tue.nl/repos/prom/packages/csmminer/documentation .
the main assumption behind the csm miner is that each state of the multi-
perspective composite process under study is a vector of the states of its per-
spectives. that is, for a process with nperspectives each state of the composite
process is a state of the form: s= (s1: : :sn). the csm miner discovers
a state machine describing the states and state changes of the composite pro-
cess, as well as a state machine for each perspective. transitions ( s!s0) in
the discovered composite state machine represent state changes in one or more
perspectives, while transitions ( si!s0
i) in the discovered state machine of per-
spective irepresent a change in that specic perspective.
the input data for the csm miner is assumed to be an xes event log [4]
where each event represents a state change in a specic perspective. in fig. 1
an example of the desired input is shown. each trace in the log is required
to contain attributes of the form process:initialstate:[perspectivename]
specifying the initial state of each perspective at the start of the trace. each
event is required to contain an attribute of the form process:name specifying
the perspective for which it is a state change.
an example of a composite state machine and its perspective state machines
discovered by the csm miner is shown in fig. 3. each state machine is displayed
separately in an interactive visualisation where states and transitions can be
dragged to move them around.composite state machine miner 75
fig. 1: a partial xes event log that can be used as input for the csm miner.
each trace in the log is required to be annotated with attributes specifying the
initial state of each perspective and each event is required to be annotated with
the perspective to which they belong.
states and transitions are annotated with statistics and additional statistics
are shown at the bottom of the visualisation for the state or transition that is
currently selected. for each state the statistics show the total number of times
this state was observed to occur in the log, as well as the total time that was
spent in this state. for each transition the statistics also show the total number
of times this transition was observed. the percentage for each transition shows
the observed frequency with which this transition was taken from the source
state of the transition, i.e. if a state has only one outgoing transition then it is
annotated with 100% and if there are two outgoing transitions that have been
observed equally many times then they are each annotated with 50%.
by clicking on a state or transition the states and transitions in the other
models that co-occur with the selected element are highlighted. the highlighted
states also show two dierent statistics: condence and lift. condence expresses
what percentage of time the highlighted state was observed together with a se-
lected state compared to the total time spent in that selected state. lift expresses
how much the condence diers from the percentage of time that a highlighted
state is expected to occur independent of the selected state. for a more detailed
discussion of condence and lift we refer to [3].
the visualisation of the discovered models also contains functionality that
enables the user to transform the model. this functionality can be accessed
from an expandable menu, as shown in fig. 2, and allows the user to remove
selected states from the model and to aggregate selected states. during the model
transformation the statistics are recalculated.
3 case studies
the composite state machine miner has been used during the analysis of two
case studies. the rst case study concerned the bpi challenge 2012 data of76 van eck et al.
fig. 2: the green states are selected for aggregation by the user because they are
always executed together, but in arbitrary order.
a loan application process [2]. the second case study involved the analysis of
product user behaviour data gathered by philips during the development of a
smart baby bottle equipped with various sensors. these case studies and the
insights provided by the csm miner are discussed in detail in [3].
the models shown in fig. 3 have been discovered on the bpi challenge 2012
data. these models are much more structured than models discovered by tradi-
tional process discovery algorithms on the same data. analysing them provided
useful insights into the dierence between automatically and manually processed
applications and the eectiveness of fraud investigation.
4 conclusion
in this paper we have presented the composite state machine miner, an in-
teractive tool for the discovery and exploration of state-based multi-perspective
processes. the csm miner can be used to study the interactions between per-
spectives in such processes. this has been used successfully in two case studies.
future work that we plan to do is focussed at improving the practical usability
of the tool. for example, it would be useful to suggest states or relations between
perspectives that are likely to be of interest to the user, to avoid having to click
on every element of the discovered models to explore the results. also, additional
support for dierent types of relations between perspectives would enable the
csm miner to generate additional insights.
references
1. van der aalst, w.m.p.: process mining: discovery, conformance and enhancement
of business processes. springer (2011)
2. van dongen, b.f.: bpi challenge 2012 (2012), http://dx.doi.org/10.4121/uuid:
3926db30-f712-4394-aebc-75976070e91f
3. van eck, m.l., sidorova, n., van der aalst, w.m.p.: discovering and exploring
state-based models for multi-perspective processes. in: 14th international confer-
ence on business process management (bpm). p. in press. springer (2016)
4. verbeek, h.m.w., buijs, j.c.a.m., van dongen, b.f., van der aalst, w.m.p.: xes,
xesame, and prom 6. in: information systems evolution, pp. 60{75 (2011)composite state machine miner 77
fig. 3: the interactive visualisation of a discovered composite state machine. the selected state is denoted with a red box and
its co-occurring states and transitions are highlighted in the other perspectives and the overall view based on their condence .
the statistics below the visualisation refer to the selected state or transition.