blockchains for business process management -
challenges and opportunities
jan mendlinga,, ingo weberb,c,, wil van der aalstd, jan vom brockee,
cristina cabanillasa, florian danielf, sren deboisg, claudio di ciccioa,
marlon dumash, schahram dustdari, avigdor gal1, luciano
garc a-ba~ nuelosh, guido governatorib, richard hullk, marcello la rosam,
henrik leopoldl, frank leymannn, jan reckerm, manfred reicherto, hajo a.
reijersl, stefanie rinderle-map, andreas rogge-soltia, michael rosemannm,
stefan schultei, munindar p. singhq, tijs slaatsr, mark staplesb,c, barbara
webers, matthias weidlicht, mathias weskeu, xiwei xub,c, liming zhub,c
awirtschaftsuniversit at wien, vienna, austria
bdata61, csiro, australia
cuniversity of new south wales, sydney, australia
deindhoven university of technology, eindhoven, the netherlands
euniversity of liechtenstein, liechtenstein
fpolitecnico di milano, italy
git university of copenhagen, denmark
huniversity of tartu, estonia
itu wien, vienna, austria
jtechnion - israel institute of technology, haifa, israel
kibm research, yorktown heights, ny, usa
lvrije universiteit amsterdam, amsterdam, the netherlands
mqueensland university of technology, brisbane, australia
niaas, universit at stuttgart, germany
oulm university, ulm, germany
puniversity of vienna, vienna, austria
qnorth carolina state university, raleigh, nc, usa
runiversity of copenhagen, copenhagen, denmark
stechnical university of denmark, lyngby, and
university of innsbruck, innsbruck, austria, denmark
thumboldt-universit at zu berlin, germany
corresponding author
email addresses: jan.mendling@wu.ac.at (jan mendling),
ingo.weber@data61.csiro.au (ingo weber), w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tue.nl (wil van der aalst),
jan.vom.brocke@uni.li (jan vom brocke), cristina.cabanillas@wu.ac.at (cristina
cabanillas), florian.daniel@polimi.it (florian daniel), debois@itu.dk (sren debois),
claudio.di.ciccio@wu.ac.at (claudio di ciccio), marlon.dumas@ut.ee (marlon dumas),
dustdar@tuwien.ac.at (schahram dustdar), avigal@technion.ac.il (avigdor gal),
luciano.garcia@ut.ee (luciano garc a-ba~ nuelos), guido.governatori@data61.csiro.au
(guido governatori), hull@us.ibm.com (richard hull), m.larosa@qut.edu.au (marcello la
rosa), h.leopold@vu.nl (henrik leopold), frank.leymann@iaas.uni-stuttgart.de (frank
leymann), j.recker@qut.edu.au (jan recker), manfred.reichert@uni-ulm.de (manfred
reichert), h.a.reijers@vu.nl (hajo a. reijers), stefanie.rinderle-ma@univie.ac.at
(stefanie rinderle-ma), andreas.rogge-solti@wu.ac.at (andreas rogge-solti),
m.rosemann@qut.edu.au (michael rosemann), stefan.schulte@tuwien.ac.at (stefan
schulte), mpsingh@ncsu.edu (munindar p. singh), slaats@di.ku.dk (tijs slaats),
mark.staples@data61.csiro.au (mark staples), bweb@dtu.dk (barbara weber),
matthias.weidlich@hu-berlin.de (matthias weidlich), mathias.weske@hpi.de (mathias
weske), xiwei.xu@data61.csiro.au (xiwei xu), liming.zhu@data61.csiro.au (liming zhu)
preprint submitted to acm transactions on management information systems july 4, 2017arxiv:1704.03610v2  [cs.se]  2 jul 2017uhasso-plattner-institute, universit at potsdam, germany
abstract
blockchain technology oers a sizable promise to rethink the way inter-organizational
business processes are managed because of its potential to realize execution with-
out a central party serving as a single point of trust (and failure). to stimulate
research on this promise and the limits thereof, in this paper we outline the
challenges and opportunities of blockchain for business process management
(bpm). we structure our commentary alongside two established frameworks,
namely the six bpm core capabilities and the bpm lifecycle, and detail seven
research directions for investigating the application of blockchain technology to
bpm.
keywords: blockchain, business process management, research challenges
1. introduction
business process management (bpm) is concerned with the design, execu-
tion, monitoring, and improvement of business processes. systems that support
the enactment and execution of processes have extensively been used by com-
panies to streamline and automate intra -organizational processes. yet, for in-
ter-organizational processes, challenges for the joint design and a lack of mutual
trust have hampered a broader uptake.
emerging blockchain technology has the potential to drastically change the
environment in which inter-organizational processes are able to operate. blockchains
oer a way to execute processes in a trustworthy manner even in a network with-
out any mutual trust between nodes. key aspects are specic algorithms that
lead to consensus among the nodes and market mechanisms that motivate the
nodes to progress the network. through these capabilities, this technology has
the potential to shift the discourse in bpm research about how systems might
enable the enactment, execution, monitoring or improvement of business process
within or across business networks.
in this paper, we describe what we believe are the main new challenges and
opportunities of blockchain technology for bpm. this leads to directions for
research activities to investigate both challenges and opportunities. section 2
provides a background on fundamental concepts of blockchain technology and
an illustrative example of how this technology applies to business processes. in
sections 3 and 4 we then discuss blockchains' impact on bpm. we use the six
core bpm elements [rosemann & vom brocke, 2015] and the bpm lifecycle
phases [dumas et al., 2013] to structure this discussion. section 5 summarizes
this discussion by emphasizing seven future research directions.
22. background
this section summarizes the essential aspects of blockchain technology and
discusses initial research eorts at the intersection of bpm and blockchains.
2.1. blockchain technology
blockchain is the technology underlying bitcoin and other cryptocurren-
cies [nakamoto, 2008]. it is a distributed database technology that builds on
a tamper-proof list of timestamped transaction records. its innovative power
stems from allowing parties to transact with others they do not trust over a
network in which nobody is trusted. this is enabled by a combination of peer-
to-peer networks, consensus-making, cryptography, and market mechanisms.
blockchains ensure data integrity and transparency, such that the blockchain
network stays operational even under byzantine faults. a copy of the entire
blockchain is held on every node on the network and consensus is achieved
either by proof-of-work or proof-of-stake algorithms [mougayar, 2016].
blockchain technology is more broadly applicable than to cryptocurrencies
alone: in essence, it oers access to the history of all previous states. fur-
thermore, several of the available implementations of blockchain networks oer
the possibility of executing user-dened scripts, so-called smart contracts [sz-
abo, 1997]. for instance, the ethereum blockchain supports turing-complete
programming languages for smart contracts1. the code in this language is
deterministic and relies on a closed-world assumption: only knowledge from
blockchain transactions is available in the runtime environment. smart con-
tract code is deployed with a specic type of transaction. as with any other
blockchain transaction, the deployment of smart contract code to the blockchain
is immutable. once deployed, smart contracts oer a way to execute code di-
rectly on the blockchain network, for instance to transfer money if a certain
condition is fullled. this way, untrusted parties can establish trust in the
truthful execution of the code. smart contracts can be used to implement busi-
ness collaborations in general, and inter-organizational business processes in
particular. the potential of blockchain-based distributed ledgers to enable col-
laboration in open environments has been successfully tested in diverse elds
ranging from diamonds trading to securities settlement [walport, 2016].
blockchain technology itself still faces numerous general technological chal-
lenges, which swan [2015] organized into the categories we discuss in the follow-
ing. a mapping study by yli-huumo et al. [2016] found that a majority of these
challenges have not been addressed by the research community, albeit we note
that blockchain developer communities actively discuss some of these challenges
and suggest a myriad of potential solutions2.
1https://www.ethereum.org/
2http://www.the-blockchain.com/2017/01/24/adi-ben-ari-outstanding-challenges-
blockchain-technology-2017/
3throughput in the bitcoin blockchain is limited to 7 transaction inclusions
per second (tps) currently, and is likely to double in the near future. in
comparison, transaction volumes for the visa payment network are 2,000
tps on average, with a tested capacity of up to 50,000 tps. ethereum
achieves on the order of 15 tps. however, this limitation becomes less
relevant if private or consortium blockchains [mougayar, 2016] were used
in cross-organizational networks.
latency is a weak spot of bitcoin in particular, where transaction inclusion
in the absence of network congestion would take on average 15 minutes
(1.5x interblock time of 10 minutes, since the transaction on average gets
submitted half-way into a block creation, and mining the next block which
includes this transaction takes 1 interblock time). in addition, 5 conrma-
tion blocks are typically recommended to ensure the transaction does not
get removed due to accidental or deliberate (malicious) forking { resulting
in an average 65 minutes to be certain a transaction remains part of the
ledger permanently. network congestion increases this number further.
other public blockchains like ethereum decrease this time to about 3 to
10 minutes, depending on the required level of probabilistic guarantees.
private or consortium blockchains can use other mechanisms, like coordi-
nated mining, which can reduce the transaction conrmation time. eorts
like the lightning network orraiden propose to create lightweight, very
fast transaction networks on top of public blockchains like bitcoin and
ethereum. they achieve this by binding liquidity and smart contracts.
while highly promising, these concepts are still in their infancy. simi-
larly, side chains are blockchains that are spun o a main chain, with ties
back to the main chain. by including cryptographic hashes of the side
chain periodically into the main chain, the history of the side chain could
not be rewritten without overpowering the main chain. thus, side chains
can aord to operate on much less computational power. nevertheless,
blockchains are unlikely to achieve latencies as low as centrally-controlled
systems, due to their distributed nature. their use will remain a trade-o.
size and bandwidth limitations are variations of the throughput issue: if
the transaction volume of visa were to be processed by bitcoin, the full
replication of the entire blockchain data structure would pose massive
problems { yli-huumo et al. [2016] quote 214 pb per year, thus posing a
challenge in data storage and bandwidth. private and consortium chains
and concepts like the lightning network or side chains all aim to address
these challenges.
usability is limited, in terms of both developer support (lack of adequate tool-
ing) and end-user support (hard to use and understand). recent advances
on developer support include eorts by some of the authors towards model-
driven development [weber et al., 2016; garc a-ba~ nuelos et al., 2017; tran
et al., 2017].
4security will always pose a challenge on an open network like a public blockchain.
security is often discussed in terms of the cia properties [dhillon & back-
house, 2000]. first, condentiality is per se low in a distributed system
that replicates all data over its network, but can be addressed by tar-
geted encryption [kosba et al., 2016]. second, integrity is a strong suit of
blockchains, albeit challenges do exist [eyal & sirer, 2014; gervais et al.,
2016]. third, availability can be considered high in terms of reads from
blockchain due to the wide replication, but less clear in terms of write
availability, since large-scale experiments on this matter have not been
published to date. the often-quoted 51% attack of nodes taking over the
blockchain [bradbury, 2013] is a fairly theoretical question for large-scale
blockchains like bitcoin. bitcoin miners are hypothesized to collectively
use as much power as paraguay, the entire country, mostly with specialized
hardware. to amass more computational power than that is unlikely for
any given player, be it a nation state or a corporation. it does, however,
remain a credible threat for consortium blockchains { albeit these can be
controlled with organizational governance structures.
wasted resources, particularly electricity, are due to the proof-of-work mech-
anism, where miners constantly compete in a race to mine the next block
for a high reward. alternatives, like proof-of-stake [bentov et al., 2016],
have been discussed for a while and would be much more ecient. at the
time of writing, they remain an unproven but highly interesting alterna-
tive.
hard forks are changes to the protocol of a blockchain which enable transac-
tions or blocks which were previously considered invalid [decker & wat-
tenhofer, 2013]. they essentially change the rules of the game and there-
fore require a consensus by a vast majority of the miners to be eec-
tive [bonneau et al., 2015]. while hard forks can be controversial in public
blockchains, as demonstrated by the split of the ethereum blockchain into
a hard forked main chain and ethereum classic, this is less of an issue for
private and consortium blockchains where such a consensus is more easily
found.
many of these general technological challenges of blockchains are currently the
focus of the emergent body of research. as noted, several solution attempts to
the problems above have been proposed and tested. notwithstanding current
and future issues and developments, our main interest is in the potential of
blockchain technology to enable a consensus shift in bpm research. our belief
is vested both in the novel technological properties discussed above and in the
already available attempts of using blockchain technology in the denition and
implementation of fundamentally novel business processes. we review these
attempts in the following.
5supply
supplierreceive
orderreceive
requestprovide
detailsprovide
waybill
produceprepare
transport
special carrierreceive
orderrequest
detailsreceive
detailsreceive
waybilldeliver
order
middlemanreceive
order
forward
orderorder
transport
manufacturercalculate
demand
place
orderreceive
orderreport
start of
production
producereceive
orderdeliver
product
bulkbuyerfigure 1: supply chain scenario from weber et al. [2016]
2.2. business processes and blockchain technology
we are not the rst to identify the application potential of blockchain tech-
nology to business processes. in fact, several blockchains are currently adopted
in various domains to facilitate the operation of new business processes. for
example, nofer et al. [2017] list applications in the nancial sector including
crypto-currency transactions, securities trading and settlement, and insurances
as well as non-nancial applications such as notary services, music distribution,
and various services for proof of existence, authenticity and storage. other
works describe application scenarios involving blockchain technology in logistics
and supply chain processes, for instance in the agricultural sector [staples et al.,
2017].
a proposal to support inter-organizational processes through blockchain
technology is described by weber et al. [2016]: specic aspects of inter-organizational
business processes can be compiled into smart contracts that ensure the joint
process is correctly executed. so-called trigger components allow connecting
these inter-organizational process implementations to web services and inter-
nal process implementations. these triggers serve as a bridge between the
blockchain and enterprise applications. the cryptocurrency concept enables
the optional implementation of conditional payment and built-in escrow man-
agement at dened points within the process, where this is desired and feasible.
to illustrate these capabilities, figure 1 shows a simplied supply chain sce-
nario, where a bulk buyer orders goods from a manufacturer. the manufacturer,
in turn, orders supplies through a middleman, which are sent from the supplier
to the manufacturer via a special carrier. without global monitoring each par-
6ticipant has a restricted visibility of the overall progress. this may very well be
a basis for misunderstandings and shifting blame in cases of conict.
if executed using smart contracts on a blockchain, typical barriers com-
plicating the deployment of inter-organization processes can be removed. (i)
the blockchain can serve as an immutable public ledger, so that participants
can review a trustworthy history of messages to pinpoint the source of an er-
ror. this means that all state-changing messages have to be recorded in the
blockchain. (ii) smart contracts can oer independent process monitoring from
a global viewpoint, such that only expected messages are accepted, and only if
they are sent from the player registered for the respective role in the process
instance. (iii) encryption can ensure that only the data that must be visible
is public, while the remaining data is only readable for the process participants
that require it.
these capabilities demonstrate how blockchains can help organizations to
implement and execute business processes across organizational boundaries even
if they cannot agree on a trusted third party. this is a fundamental advance,
because the core aspects of this technology now enable support of enterprise
collaborations going far beyond asset management, including the management
of entire supply chains, tracking food from source to consumption to increase
safety, or sharing personal health records in privacy-ensuring ways amongst
medical service providers.
the technical realization of this advance is still nascent at this stage, al-
though some early eorts can be found in the literature. for example, smart
contracts that enforce a process execution in a trustworthy way can be generated
from bpmn process models [weber et al., 2016] and from domain-specic lan-
guages [frantz & nowostawski, 2016]. further cost optimizations are proposed
by garc a-ba~ nuelos et al. [2017]. likewise, the anity of artifact-centric process
specication [cohn & hull, 2009; marin et al., 2012] to blockchain execution has
already been emphasized by hull et al. [2016].
even at this stage, research on the benets and potentials of blockchain
technology is mixed with studies that highlight or examine issues and challenges.
for example, norta [2015, 2016] discusses ways to ensure secure negotiation
and creation of smart contracts for decentralized autonomous organizations
(daos), among others in order to avoid attacks like the dao hack during which
approx. us$ 60m were stolen. this in turn was partly reversed by a hard fork of
the ethereum blockchain, which was controversial among the respective mining
node operators and resulted in a part of the public ethereum network splintering
o into the ethereum classic (etc) network. this split, in turn, caused major
issues for the network in the medium term, allowing among others replay attacks
where transactions from etherium can be replayed on etc. a formal analysis of
smart contract participants using game theory and formal methods is conducted
by bigi et al. [2015]. as pointed out by norta [2016], the assumption of perfect
rationality underlying the game-theoretic analysis is unlikely to hold for human
participants.
these examples go to show that blockchain technology and its application
to bpm are at an important crossroads: technical realization issues blend with
7promising application scenarios; early implementations mix with unanticipated
challenges. it is timely, therefore, to discuss in broad and encompassing ways
where open questions lie that the scholarly community should be interested in
addressing. we do so in the two sections that follow.
3. blockchain technology and bpm capabilities
we now discuss challenges and opportunities for bpm that arise from blockchain
technology in relation to six bpm core capability areas [rosemann & vom
brocke, 2015], namely strategic alignment, governance, methods, information
technology, people, and culture.
3.1. strategic alignment
strategic alignment refers to the active management of connections between
organizational priorities and enterprise processes [rosemann & vom brocke,
2015], which aims at facilitating eective actions to improve business perfor-
mance. currently, various approaches to bpm assume that the corporate strat-
egy is dened rst and business processes are aligned with the respective strate-
gic imperatives [dumas et al., 2013]. blockchain technology challenges these
approaches to strategic alignment in the following way.
first, companies need to dene a strategic position with respect to blockchain
technology, such that processes can be aligned with this position. this calls for
research on how the impact of blockchains on specic processes can be sys-
tematically analyzed. such analysis includes, for instance, the assessment of
which processes can be improved with blockchains, which new strategic prior-
ities emerge from using blockchain technology in business processes, or which
strategic risks comparable to lock-in eects [tassey, 2000] might emerge.
second, blockchain as a disruptive technology challenges the traditional
process-follows-strategy paradigm, which could be ipped upside down with new
blockchain-based processes challenging entire industries. for many companies,
a potential disintermediation enabled by the use of blockchain-based systems
might pose more of a threat than an opportunity, as discussed for instance for
the banking industry [guo & liang, 2016].
3.2. governance
bpm governance refers to appropriate and transparent accountability in
terms of roles, responsibilities, and decision processes for dierent bpm-related
programs, projects, and operations [rosemann & vom brocke, 2015]. currently,
bpm as a management approach builds on the explicit denition of bpm-related
roles and responsibilities with a focus on the internal operations of a company.
blockchain technology changes governance towards a more externally oriented
coopetition as a new management mode for processes. this has the following
implications.
first, dedicated roles have to be dened that liaise not only with internal,
but also with external partners for setting up blockchain support for processes.
these new roles require both technical and jurisprudential knowledge.
8second, there is a need for policies that dene where and when blockchain
technology can be used or must not be used for supporting processes. for in-
stance, cryptocurrencies have highly volatile exchange rates to traditional cur-
rencies { gains and losses of 10-50% within a single day are not uncommon. it
is expected that this volatility will decrease with broader uptake [mougayar,
2016]; but as of today, it is a roadblock for many applications. exchange rate
volatility is less of a concern for private and consortium-based blockchains which
will not see a sudden inux of new capital without prior authorization and are
less likely to attach monetary value to blocks, but rather use blockchain as a
common ledger for shared processes and data.
third, new attack scenarios on blockchain networks are dicult to fore-
see [hurlburt, 2016]. therefore, guidelines for using private, public, or consortium-
based blockchains are required [mougayar, 2016]. it also has to be decided what
types of smart contract and which cryptocurrency are allowed to be used.
finally, smart contracts promise to facilitate self-governance of not only
processes, but of entire organizations. research on corporate governance in-
vestigates agency problems and eective mechanisms to incentivize intended
behavior [shleifer & vishny, 1997]. smart contracts can be used to establish
new governance models as exemplied by the decentralized autonomous orga-
nization (dao)3. it is an important question in how far this idea of the dao
can be extended towards reducing the agency problem of management discre-
tion or eventually eliminate the need for management altogether. furthermore,
the revolutionary change suggested by the dao for organization shows just how
disruptive this technology can be, and whether similarly radical changes could
apply to bpm.
3.3. methods
bpm methods refer to tools and techniques that support management ac-
tivities along the process lifecycle and throughout an enterprise-wide bpm pro-
gram [dumas et al., 2013]. currently, these methods often focus on issues and
weaknesses of how a process currently operates and they require labor-intensive
and time-consuming data collection and analysis.
blockchains may aect methods in the following three ways. first, specic
novel analysis methods are required to assess costs, benets, and potential risks
associated with using blockchain for processes. second, specic engineering
methods are needed to address the specic features of blockchain technology
and its usage in supporting inter-organizational processes. in particular, there
is a need for formal reasoning capabilities about the correctness and privacy
preservation of processes that are designed based on smart contracts. finally,
the emergence of blockchain technology emphasizes the need to complement ex-
ploitative analysis methods that start from the weaknesses of existing processes
with methods that explore both new ways of implementing existing processes
3https://daohub.org
9and innovating completely new processes. in this way, blockchain might ar-
guably redirect attention from analyzing process weaknesses back to searching
unexplored new opportunities in the spirit of the process re-engineering concepts
of the early 1990s. back then, hammer & champy [1993] formulated their credo
of \do not automate, obliterate:" companies should re-engineer their processes
from scratch by the help of then new client-server technology instead of au-
tomating old-fashioned and ineective ways of operation. now, it is blockchain
that provides the potential to re-engineer processes from scratch.
3.4. information technology
bpm-related information technology subsumes all systems that support pro-
cess execution. currently, business process technology is shaped by process-
aware information systems [dumas et al., 2005] and business process manage-
ment systems [weske, 2012], which both typically assume central control over
the process.
blockchain technology enables novel ways of process execution, but several
challenges have to be considered. first, implementing processes with blockchains
requires new software components and integrated development environments.
second, such blockchain-based process execution gives rise to new challenges in
terms of security and privacy, such as how to prevent condential business data
leakage. while the visibility of encrypted data on a blockchain is restricted,
it is up to the participants in the process to ensure that these mechanisms are
used according to their condentiality requirements. some of these requirements
are currently investigated in the nancial industry4. further challenges can be
expected with the enactment of the general data protection regulation5.
finally, inherent limitations of blockchains have to be considered including
computational power, data storage, throughput, and processing costs. rather
than using an existing blockchain, an alternative could be to adopt only the cor-
responding design principles, like replicated transaction history, or using private
blockchains to reduce costs.
3.5. people
people in this context refers to all individuals, possibly in dierent roles, who
engage with bpm [rosemann & vom brocke, 2015]. currently, these are people
who work as process analyst, process manager, process owner or in other process-
related roles. the roles of these individuals are shaped by skills in the area of
management, business analysis and requirements engineering. in this capability
area, the use of blockchain technology requires extensions of their skill sets. new
required skills relate to partner and contract management, software enginering,
and cryptography. blockchains and the design of smart contracts will also re-
quire new ways of thinking about people, since actors in inter-organizational
4https://gendal.me/2016/04/05/introducing-r3-corda-a-distributed-ledger-designed-for-
nancial-services/
5http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/txt/?uri=uriserv:oj.l .2016.119.01.0001.01.eng
10processes have more freedom to act than intra-organizational process partici-
pants. this is not only a challenge, but also an opportunity since the openness
of blockchains makes it easy to oer incentives for third parties to contribute to
ongoing processes. finally, people have to be willing to design blockchain-based
collaborations within the frame of existing regulations to enable adoption. this
implies that research into blockchain-specic technology acceptance is needed,
extending the established technology acceptance model [venkatesh, 2014].
3.6. culture
organizational culture is dened by the collective values of a group of peo-
ple in an organization [rosemann & vom brocke, 2015]. currently, bpm
is discussed in relation to organizational culture [vom brocke & sinnl, 2011]
from a perspective that emphasizes an anity with clan and hierarchy cul-
ture [ stemberger et al., 2017]. these culture types are often found in the many
companies that use bpm as an approach for documentation. blockchains are
likely to inuence organizational culture towards a stronger emphasis on exi-
bility and an outward-looking perspective. in the competing values framework
by cameron & quinn [2005], these aspects are associated with an adhocracy
organizational culture. furthermore, not only consequences of blockchain adop-
tion have to be studied, but also antecedants. these include organizational
factors that facilitate early and successful adoption.
4. blockchain technology and the bpm lifecycle
in this section, we discuss blockchain in relation to the traditional bpm life-
cycle [dumas et al., 2013] including the following phases: identication, discov-
ery, analysis, redesign, implementation, execution, monitoring, and adaptation.
these phases mainly refer to the general information technology and methods
capability areas. we discuss specic challenges for each phase here.
4.1. identication
process identication is concerned with the high-level description and evalu-
ation of a company from a process-oriented perspective, thus connecting strate-
gic alignment with process improvement. currently, identication is mostly ap-
proached from an inward-looking perspective [dumas et al., 2013]. blockchain
technology adds another relevant perspective for evaluating high-level processes
in terms of the implied strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. re-
search is needed into how these perspectives can be systematically integrated
into the identication phase. because blockchains have anity with the support
of inter-organizational processes, process identication may need to encompass
not only the needs of one organization, but broader known and even unknown
partners.
114.2. discovery
process discovery refers to the collection of information about the current
way a process operates and its representation as an as-is process model. cur-
rently, classical methods of process discovery and elicitation are complemented
by various recent process mining techniques for structured and non-encrypted
data [van der aalst, 2016]. blockchain technology denes new challenges for pro-
cess discovery techniques: the information may be fragmented and encrypted;
accounts and keys can change frequently; and payload data may be stored partly
on-chain and partly o-chain. this fragmentation might require a repeated
alignment of information from all relevant parties operating on the blockchain.
work on matching could represent a promising starting point to solve this prob-
lem [euzenat & shvaiko, 2013; gal, 2011; cayoglu et al., 2014]. there is both
the risk and opportunity of conducting process mining on the blockchain. an
opportunity could involve establishing trust in how a process or a prospective
business partner operates, while a risk is that other parties may gain access to
internal information and know-how. there are also opportunities for reverse
engineering business processes, among others, from smart contracts.
4.3. analysis
process analysis refers to obtaining insights into issues relating to the way a
business process currently operates. currently, the analysis of processes mostly
builds on data that is available inside of organizations or from perceptions shared
by internal and external process stakeholders [dumas et al., 2013]. records
of processes executed on the blockchain yield valuable information that can
help to assess the case load, durations, frequencies of paths, parties involved,
and correlations between unencrypted data items. these pieces of information
can be used to discover processes, detect deviations, and conduct root cause
analysis [van der aalst, 2016], ranging over small groups of companies or over
an industry at large.
4.4. redesign
process redesign deals with the systematic improvement of a process. cur-
rently, process redesign is mostly supported by so-called redesign heuristics,
which formulate proven solutions for specic issues a process might face [vanwer-
sch et al., 2016]. blockchain technology oers novel ways of improving specic
business processes or resolving specic problems, e.g. because blockchain oers
new ways of interaction in cross-organizational settings. the question is where
blockchains can be applied for optimizing existing interactions and where new
interaction patterns without a trusted central party can be established, poten-
tially drawing on insights from related research on web service interaction [bar-
ros et al., 2005]. a promising direction for developing blockchain-appropriate
abstractions and heuristics may come from data-aware workows [marin et al.,
2012] and bpmn choreography diagrams [decker & weske, 2011]. both tech-
niques combine two primary ingredients of blockchain, namely data and pro-
cess, in a holistic manner that is well-suited for top-down design of cross-
12organizational processes. it might also be benecial to formulate blockchain-
specic redesign heuristics that could mimic how incoterms [ramberg, 2011]
dene standardized interactions in international trade. specic challenges for
redesign include the joint engineering of blockchain processes between all parties
involved, an ongoing problem for choreography design. balancing the trade-o
between blockchain benets, transaction cost, risk, delay, and other factors is a
major open question.
4.5. implementation
process implementation refers to the procedure of transforming a to-be model
into software components executing the business process. currently, business
processes are often implemented using process-aware information systems or
business process management systems inside single organizations. some of the
challenges of model transformation to blockchain artifacts are discussed by we-
ber et al. [2016]. several ideas from earlier work on choreography can be reused
in this new setting [van der aalst & weske, 2001; mendling & hafner, 2008;
weber et al., 2008; decker & weske, 2011; chopra et al., 2014; telang & singh,
2012]. it has to be noted that choreographies have not been adopted by in-
dustry to a large extent yet. despite this, they are especially helpful in inter-
organizational settings, where it is not possible to control and monitor a com-
plete process in a centralized fashion because of organizational borders [breu
et al., 2013]. to verify that contracts between choreography stakeholders have
been fullled, a trust basis, which is not under control of a particular party,
needs to be established. blockchains may serve to establish this kind of trust
between stakeholders.
an important challenge on the implementation level is the identication
and denition of abstractions for the design of blockchain-based business pro-
cess execution. libraries and operations for engines are required, accompanied
by modeling primitives and language extensions of bpmn. software patterns
and anti-patterns will be of good help to engineers designing blockchain-based
processes. there is also a need for new approaches for quality assurance, cor-
rectness, and verication, as well as for new quality assurance and correctness
criteria. these can build on existing notions of compliance [van der aalst et al.,
2008], reliability subramanian et al. [2008], quality of services [zeng et al., 2004]
or data-aware workow verication [calvanese et al., 2013], but will have to go
further in terms of consistency and consideration of potential payments. fur-
thermore, dynamic partner binding and rebinding is a challenge that requires
attention. process participants will have to nd partners, either manually or
automatically on dedicated marketplaces using dedicated look-up services. for
instance, the property of inhabiting a certain role in a process might itself be a
tradable asset, e.g., a supplier may auction o the role of shipper to the highest
bidder as part of the process. also, directories for smart contract templates will
emerge. all these characteristics emphasize the need for specic testing and ver-
ication approaches. finally, as more and more companies use blockchain there
will be a proliferation of smart contract templates available for use. tools for
nding templates appropriate for a given style of collaboration will be essential.
134.6. execution
execution refers to the instantiation of individual cases and their information-
technological processing. currently, such execution is facilitated by process-
aware information systems or business process management systems [dumas
et al., 2013]. for the actual execution of a process deployed on a blockchain fol-
lowing the method of weber et al. [2016], several dierences with the traditional
ways exist. during the execution of an instance, messages between participants
need to be passed as blockchain transactions to the smart contract; resulting
messages need to be observed from the blocks in the blockchain. both of these
can be achieved by integrating blockchain technology directly with existing en-
terprise systems, or through the use of dedicated integration components, such
as the triggers suggested by weber et al. [2016]. the main challenge here in-
volves ensuring correctness and security, especially when monetary assets are
transferred using this technology.
4.7. monitoring
process monitoring refers to collecting events of process executions, display-
ing them in an understandable way, and triggering alerts and escalation in cases
where undesired behavior is observed. currently, such process execution data is
recorded by systems that support process execution [dumas et al., 2013]. first,
we face issues in terms of data fragmentation and encryption as in the analysis
phase; e.g., the need to integrate local o-chain data with decrypted local copies
of on-chain data. with such tracing in place, the global view of the process can
be monitored independently by each involved party. this provides a suitable
basis for continuous conformance and compliance checking and monitoring of
service-level agreements. second, based on monitoring data exchanged via the
blockchain, it is possible to verify if a process instance meets the original pro-
cess model and the contractual obligations of all involved process stakeholders.
for this, blockchain technology can be exploited to store the process execution
data and handovers between process participants. notably, this is even possible
without the usage of smart contracts, i.e., in a rst-generation blockchain like
the one operated by bitcoin [prybila et al., 2017].
4.8. adaptation
runtime adaptation refers to the concept of changing the process during
execution. currently, this can for instance be achieved by allowing participants
in a process to change the model during its execution [reichert & weber, 2012].
in the setting discussed by weber et al. [2016], blockchain is used to enforce
conformance with the model, so that participants can rely on the joint model
being followed. in such a setting, adaptation is by default something to be
avoided: if a participant can change the model, this could be used to gain an
unfair advantage over the other participants. for instance, the rules of retriev-
ing cryptocurrency from an escrow account could be changed, or the terms of
payment. therefore, process adaptation must strictly adhere to dened paths
for it, e.g., any change to a deployed smart contract may require a transaction
14signed by all participants. more abstractly speaking, in order to preserve trust-
worthiness it must be clear who can change what, until when and under which
circumstances. there are also problems arising in relation to evolution. new
smart contracts will be needed to reect changes to a new version of the pro-
cess model. porting running instances from an old version to a new one would
require eective coordination mechanisms involving all participants.
5. seven future research directions
blockchains will fundamentally shift how we deal with transactions in gen-
eral, and therefore how organizations manage their business processes within
their network. our discussion of challenges in relation to the bpm capability
areas and the bpm lifecycle points to seven major future research directions:
1. understanding the impact of blockchain on strategy and governance, in
particular regarding new business and governance models enabled by rev-
olutionary innovation based on blockchain.
2. devising new methods for analysis and engineering business processes
based on blockchain technology.
3. investigating the culture shift towards openness in the management and
execution of business processes, and on hiring as well as upskilling people
as needed.
4. developing techniques for identifying, discovering, and analyzing relevant
processes for their adoption of blockchain technology.
5. redesigning processes to leverage the opportunities granted by blockchain.
just like the move from paper les to digital les allowed streamlining pro-
cesses, blockchain may allow re-imagining how processes can be done in
collaboration with external stakeholders. the whole area of choreogra-
phies may be re-vitalized by this technology.
6. developing a diverse set of execution and monitoring frameworks on blockchain.
7. dening appropriate methods for evolution and adaptation.
the bpm community has a unique opportunity to help shape this fundamen-
tal shift towards a distributed, trustworthy infrastructure to promote inter-
organizational processes. with this paper we aim to provide clarity, focus, and
impetus for the research challenges that are upon us.
references
references
van der aalst, w. m. p. (2016). process mining - data science in action,
second edition . springer.
van der aalst, w. m. p., dumas, m., ouyang, c., rozinat, a., & verbeek,
e. (2008). conformance checking of service behavior. acm trans. internet
techn. ,8.
15van der aalst, w. m. p., & weske, m. (2001). the p2p approach to interorga-
nizational workows. in proc. caise (pp. 140{156).
barros, a., dumas, m., & ter hofstede, a. h. (2005). service interaction pat-
terns. in international conference on business process management (pp.
302{318). springer.
bentov, i., gabizon, a., & mizrahi, a. (2016). cryptocurrencies without proof
of work. in j. clark, s. meiklejohn, p. y. ryan, d. wallach, m. brenner, &
k. rohlo (eds.), financial cryptography and data security: fc 2016 inter-
national workshops, bitcoin, voting, and wahc, christ church, bar-
bados, february 26, 2016, revised selected papers (pp. 142{157). berlin, hei-
delberg: springer berlin heidelberg. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-662-53357-4_10 . doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-53357-4_10 .
bigi, g., bracciali, a., meacci, g., & tuosto, e. (2015). validation of de-
centralised smart contracts through game theory and formal methods. in
c. bodei, g. ferrari, & c. priami (eds.), programming languages with ap-
plications to biology and security: essays dedicated to pierpaolo degano
on the occasion of his 65th birthday (pp. 142{161). springer international
publishing.
bonneau, j., miller, a., clark, j., narayanan, a., kroll, j. a., & felten, e. w.
(2015). sok: research perspectives and challenges for bitcoin and cryptocur-
rencies. in 2015 ieee symposium on security and privacy (pp. 104{121).
doi:10.1109/sp.2015.14 .
bradbury, d. (2013). the problem with bitcoin. computer fraud & security ,
2013 , 5{8.
breu, r., dustdar, s., eder, j., huemer, c., kappel, g., k opke, j., langer,
p., mangler, j., mendling, j., neumann, g., rinderle-ma, s., schulte, s.,
sobernig, s., & weber, b. (2013). towards living inter-organizational pro-
cesses. in 15th ieee conference on business informatics (pp. 363{366).
ieee. doi: dx.doi.org/10.1109/cbi.2013.59 .
vom brocke, j., & sinnl, t. (2011). culture in business process management:
a literature review. business process management journal ,17, 357{378.
calvanese, d., de giacomo, g., & montali, m. (2013). foundations of data-
aware process analysis: a database theory perspective. in r. hull, & w. fan
(eds.), proceedings of the 32nd acm sigmod-sigact-sigart sympo-
sium on principles of database systems, pods 2013, new york, ny, usa
- june 22 - 27, 2013 (pp. 1{12). acm.
cameron, k. s., & quinn, r. e. (2005). diagnosing and changing organizational
culture: based on the competing values framework . john wiley & sons.
16cayoglu, u., dijkman, r. m., dumas, m., fettke, p., garc a-ba~ nuelos, l.,
hake, p., klinkm uller, c., leopold, h., ludwig, a., loos, p., mendling, j.,
oberweis, a., schoknecht, a., sheetrit, e., thaler, t., ullrich, m., weber, i.,
& weidlich, m. (2014). report: the process model matching contest 2013.
in n. lohmann, m. song, & p. wohed (eds.), business process management
workshops - bpm 2013 international workshops, beijing, china, august 26,
2013, revised papers (pp. 442{463). springer volume 171 of lecture notes
in business information processing .
chopra, a. k., dalpiaz, f., aydemir, f. b., giorgini, p., mylopoulos, j., &
singh, m. p. (2014). protos: foundations for engineering innovative sociotech-
nical systems. in proceedings of the 18th ieee international requirements
engineering conference (re) (pp. 53{62). karlskrona, sweden: ieee com-
puter society.
cohn, d., & hull, r. (2009). business artifacts: a data-centric approach to
modeling business operations and processes. ieee data eng. bull. ,32, 3{9.
url: http://sites.computer.org/debull/a09sept/david.pdf .
decker, c., & wattenhofer, r. (2013). information propagation in the bitcoin
network. in p2p (pp. 1{10). ieee.
decker, g., & weske, m. (2011). interaction-centric modeling of process chore-
ographies. inf. syst. ,36, 292{312.
dhillon, g., & backhouse, j. (2000). technical opinion: information system
security management in the new millennium. communications of the acm ,
43, 125{128.
dumas, m., van der aalst, w. m. p., & ter hofstede, a. h. m. (2005). process-
aware information systems: bridging people and software through process
technology . wiley. url: http://eu.wiley.com/wileycda/wileytitle/
productcd-0471663069.html .
dumas, m., rosa, m. l., mendling, j., & reijers, h. a. (2013). fundamentals
of business process management . springer.
euzenat, j., & shvaiko, p. (2013). ontology matching, second edition . springer.
eyal, i., & sirer, e. g. (2014). majority is not enough: bitcoin mining is
vulnerable. in n. christin, & r. safavi-naini (eds.), financial cryptog-
raphy and data security: 18th international conference, fc 2014, christ
church, barbados, march 3-7, 2014, revised selected papers (pp. 436{454).
berlin, heidelberg: springer berlin heidelberg. url: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-662-45472-5_28 . doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-45472-5_28 .
frantz, c. k., & nowostawski, m. (2016). from institutions to code: towards
automated generation of smart contracts. in workshop on engineering col-
lective adaptive systems (ecas), co-located with saso, augsburg .
17gal, a. (2011). uncertain schema matching . synthesis lectures on data man-
agement. morgan & claypool publishers.
garc a-ba~ nuelos, l., ponomarev, a., dumas, m., & weber, i. (2017). optimized
execution of business processes on blockchain. in bpm'17: international
conference on business process management . barcelona, spain.
gervais, a., karame, g. o., w ust, k., glykantzis, v., ritzdorf, h., &
capkun, s. (2016). on the security and performance of proof of work
blockchains. in proceedings of the 2016 acm sigsac conference on
computer and communications security ccs '16 (pp. 3{16). new york,
ny, usa: acm. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2976749.2978341 .
doi:10.1145/2976749.2978341 .
guo, y., & liang, c. (2016). blockchain application and outlook in the banking
industry. financial innovation ,2, 24.
hammer, m., & champy, j. (1993). reengineering the corporation: a mani-
festo for business revolution .
hull, r., batra, v. s., chen, y., deutsch, a., iii, f. f. t. h., & vianu, v.
(2016). towards a shared ledger business collaboration language based on
data-aware processes. in q. z. sheng, e. stroulia, s. tata, & s. bhiri (eds.),
service-oriented computing - 14th international conference, icsoc 2016,
ban, ab, canada, october 10-13, 2016, proceedings (pp. 18{36). springer
volume 9936 of lecture notes in computer science .
hurlburt, g. (2016). might the blockchain outlive bitcoin? it professional ,
18, 12{16.
kosba, a., miller, a., shi, e., wen, z., & papamanthou, c. (2016). hawk: the
blockchain model of cryptography and privacy-preserving smart contracts. in
2016 ieee symposium on security and privacy (sp) (pp. 839{858). doi: 10.
1109/sp.2016.55 .
marin, m., hull, r., & vacul n, r. (2012). data centric bpm and the emerging
case management standard: a short survey. in business process management
workshops, tallinn, estonia, september 3, 2012. revised papers (pp. 24{30).
springer.
mendling, j., & hafner, m. (2008). from ws-cdl choreography to bpel
process orchestration. j. enterprise information management ,21, 525{542.
mougayar, w. (2016). the business blockchain: promise, practice, and appli-
cation of the next internet technology.
nakamoto, s. (2008). bitcoin: a peer-to-peer electronic cash system.
nofer, m., gomber, p., hinz, o., & schiereck, d. (2017). blockchain. business
& information systems engineering ,59, 183{187. url: https://doi.org/
10.1007/s12599-017-0467-3 . doi: 10.1007/s12599-017-0467-3 .
18norta, a. (2015). creation of smart-contracting collaborations for decentralized
autonomous organizations. in bir'15: international conference on perspec-
tives in business informatics research (pp. 3{17).
norta, a. (2016). designing a smart-contract application layer for transact-
ing decentralized autonomous organizations. in icacds'16: international
conference on advances in computing and data sciences .
prybila, c., schulte, s., hochreiner, c., & weber, i. (2017). runtime veri-
cation for business processes utilizing the bitcoin blockchain . arxiv report
1706.04404 arxiv. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.04404 .
ramberg, j. (2011). icc guide to incoterms 2010. icc.
reichert, m., & weber, b. (2012). enabling flexibility in process-
aware information systems - challenges, methods, technologies .
springer. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-30409-5 .
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-30409-5 .
rosemann, m., & vom brocke, j. (2015). the six core elements of business
process management. in handbook on business process management 1 (pp.
105{122). springer.
shleifer, a., & vishny, r. w. (1997). a survey of corporate governance. the
journal of nance ,52, 737{783.
staples, m., chen, s., falamaki, s., ponomarev, a., rimba, p., tran, a. b.,
weber, i., xu, x., & zhu, l. (2017). risks and opportunities for systems
using blockchain and smart contracts . technical report data61 (csiro),
sydney.
stemberger, m. i., buh, b., glavan, l. m., & mendling, j. (2017). propositions
on the interaction of organizational culture with other factors in the context
of bpm adoption. business process management journal ,23.
subramanian, s., thiran, p., narendra, n., most efaoui, g., & maamar, z.
(2008). on the enhancement of bpel engines for self-healing composite web
services. in proc. saint symposium (pp. 33{39).
swan, m. (2015). blockchain: blueprint for a new economy . o'reilly media,
inc.
szabo, n. (1997). formalizing and securing relationships on public networks.
first monday ,2.
tassey, g. (2000). standardization in technology-based markets. research pol-
icy,29, 587{602.
telang, p. r., & singh, m. p. (2012). comma: a commitment-based busi-
ness modeling methodology and its empirical evaluation. (pp. 1073{1080).
valencia, spain: ifaamas.
19tran, a. b., xu, x., weber, i., staples, m., & rimba, p. (2017). regerator: a
registry generator for blockchain. in caise'17: international conference on
advanced information systems engineering, forum track (demo) .
vanwersch, r. j. b., shahzad, k., vanderfeesten, i. t. p., vanhaecht, k.,
grefen, p. w. p. j., pintelon, l., mendling, j., van merode, g. g., &
reijers, h. a. (2016). a critical evaluation and framework of business
process improvement methods. business & information systems engi-
neering ,58, 43{53. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-015-0417-x .
doi:10.1007/s12599-015-0417-x .
venkatesh, v. (2014). technology acceptance model and the unied theory of
acceptance and use of technology. wiley encyclopedia of management , .
walport, m. (2016). distributed ledger technology: beyond blockchain. uk
government oce for science, tech. rep ,19, 2016 .
weber, i., haller, j., & m ulle, j. (2008). automated derivation of executable
business processes from choreograpies in virtual organizations. international
journal of business process integration and management (ijbpim) ,3, 85{
95.
weber, i., xu, x., riveret, r., governatori, g., ponomarev, a., & mendling,
j. (2016). untrusted business process monitoring and execution using
blockchain. in business process management - 14th international confer-
ence, bpm 2016, rio de janeiro, brazil, september 18-22, 2016. proceedings
(pp. 329{347). springer volume 9850 of lecture notes in computer science .
weske, m. (2012). business process management - concepts, languages,
architectures, 2nd edition . springer. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-28616-2 . doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-28616-2 .
yli-huumo, j., ko, d., choi, s., park, s., & smolander, k. (2016). where is cur-
rent research on blockchain technology? { a systematic review. plosone ,
11, e0163477.
zeng, l., benatallah, b., ngu, a., dumas, m., kalagnanam, j., & chang, h.
(2004). qos-aware middleware for web services composition. ieee tse ,30,
311{327.
20