discovering petri nets: it's a kind of magic  
it is a great pleasure to contribute to this liber amicorum  for my magical friend grzegorz rozenberg. 
grzegorz is not only a great scientist, but also has many other talents and is a joy to interact with.  
therefore, i would like to share some personal experiences.  
the godfather of the petri net community  
grzegorz has been  the chairman of the steering committee for the international conferences on theory 
and applications of petri nets (icatpn) in the period  from 1981 to 2004.  he has been successfully 
driving this wonderful conferences series for over t wo decades . in 2003 , i organized the petri net 
conference in eindhoven together with kees van hee. this conference was a big success and quite 
special because carl adam petri gave a talk after not having attended the conference for many years.  
grzegorz encouraged me to organize a co -located 
event  next to the petri net conference . as many 
know, his encouragements can be quite 
“persistent ”. so how could i refuse ? under his kind 
pressure , i decided to organize the first business 
process management conference  (bpm 2003) . this 
was an immediate success. over the last 15 years i 
have been serving as chair of the steering 
committee of the international bpm conference 
series. here, i’m using the tactics that grzegorz 
applied on me. this worked out well. actually, the 
bpm conference has grown to a conference series 
that is 2 or 3 times the size petri net conference  (in 
terms of submissions an d participants) . i’m still 
grateful for grzegorz’s encouragements and advice.  
today, petri nets seem to be  less “en vogue ”, however, they are part of any computer science 
curriculum and this is due to the great work done by grzegorz.  i consider him to be t he “ godfather” of 
our wonderful petri net community!  
from regions to process mining  
my own research first shifted from the modeling and simulating  logistic systems  in the eighties  to 
workflow modeling and verification  in the nineties . during the last decad e it shifted  again  from workflow 
automation and business process management to process mining. petri nets have always been a 
valuable tool in all of these endeavors.  
  
 
my current focus is on process mining, a “magical” area of research. one of the main challenges in 
process mining is process discovery, i.e., learning process models (often petri nets) from event logs. this 
is closely related to petri net synthesis and the theory of regions. together with andrzej ehrenfeucht, 
grzegorz rozen berg  provided the foundations of region theory.  the two papers on 2 -structures that 
appeared in theory of computer science in 1990 can be seen as the starting point for today’s region 
theory. this is just one example of the influence of grzegorz ’s groundbr eaking work. i’m most familiar 
with his work on the theory of concurrent systems, transition systems, and traces  (often using nets). 
however, he also made important contributions to the theory of graph transformations , to formal 
language s and automata theo ry, and (more recently) to natural computing, including molecular 
computing, computation in living cells, self -assembly, and theory of biochemical reactions . 
cultivating  habits  
grzegorz  is not only a great scholar; he also has a wonderful personality. he i s far from boring and 
always eager to learn about people ’s interests and passions . his is performing magician and a 
jheronimus bosch  expert . i spent one year at the university of colorado in boulder  where  grzegorz  is 
adjoint professor and a regular visitor.  these and other encounters enabled  me to see that he likes to 
cultivate his habits. he knows the thinks he like s and goes for it. for example, unlike many dutch 
computer science professors he has had few phd students. he rather travels around the world to work 
with the best people in his field. he likes to stick to his routines. for example, he  likes to skip the main 
course and go for two desserts instead.  above all, he is f riendly and caring . together, grzegorz and maja 
form a wonderful team, hope fully for many years to come!  
grzegorz : enjoy your 75th birthday!  
wil van der aalst  
