processprofiler3d
poppe, e.; wynn, m. t.; ter hofstede, a.h.m.; brown, r.; pini, a.; van der aalst, w.m.p.
published in:
ceur workshop proceedings
published: 01/01/2017
document version
publisher’s pdf, also known as version of record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
please check the document version of this publication:
• a submitted manuscript is the author's version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. there can be important differences
between the submitted version and the official published version of record. people interested in the research are advised to contact the
author for the final version of the publication, or visit the doi to the publisher's website.
• the final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• the final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page numbers.
link to publication
citation for published version (apa):
poppe, e., wynn, m. t., ter hofstede, a. h. m., brown, r., pini, a., & van der aalst, w. m. p. (2017).
processprofiler3d: a tool for visualising performance differences between process cohorts and process
instances. ceur workshop proceedings, 1920, [203].
general rights
copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            • users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            • you may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            • you may freely distribute the url identifying the publication in the public portal ?
take down policy
if you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
download date: 14. jan. 2018processproler3d: a tool for visualising
performance dierences between process
cohorts and process instances
e. poppe1, m.t. wynn1, a.h.m. ter hofstede12, r. brown1, a. pini3, and
w.m.p. van der aalst21
1queensland university of technology, queensland, australia
2eindhoven university of technology, eindhoven, the netherlands
3densitydesign research lab, politecnico di milano, milan, italy
abstract. an organisation's event logs can give great insight into fac-
tors that aect the execution of their business processes by comparing
dierent process cohorts. we have recently presented processproler3d,
a novel tool for such comparisons that supports interactive data explo-
ration, automatic calculation of performance data and visual comparison
of multiple cohorts. the approach enables the intuitive discovery of dif-
ferences and trends in cohort performance. to better support the inter-
pretation of these dierences in the context of process execution we now
extended the tool with a novel visualisation technique that enables the
visualisation of case execution and timing in a way that provides context
to such a performance analysis.
1 introduction
analysing process data in event logs to identify problems and opportunities
with existing processes can be of great value for improving the processes of an
organisation. process mining [1], a specialised eld of research in business pro-
cess management, develops tools and techniques to support this. by splitting
an event log into process cohorts, i.e. a group of process instances that have one
or more shared characteristics , one can analyse how dierent case character-
istics (often called context factors) aect the execution of a process. we have
recently identied that despite continued industry interest [6,4,2], there is a lack
of tools to support such analyses eectively [7]. none of the existing academic or
commercial tools provided both support for interactive data exploration, by sup-
porting interactive splitting of the event log, as well as an integrated comparison
of multiple process cohorts, by supporting the visualisation of performance data
for more than two cohorts in one view. consequently, we presented processpro-
ler3d, a framework to solve this issue [7]. we now present a complementary
novel visualisation technique that covers additional performance analysis scenar-
ios by providing additional context to the presented performance data.fig. 1: example of comparative process performance visualisation for four co-
horts on a hierarchical process model (across two dimensions - time and fre-
quency) using processproler3d
2 overview of the tool
processproler3d enables comparing the performance of multiple process co-
horts by
{aligning an event log with a process model
{calculating common node level process performance indicators such as activ-
ity duration, activity throughput time and waiting times between activities
{storing performance data in a data cube
{interactively splitting the event log by dening cohorts
{visualising performance data in a third dimension on top of the process model
at multiple levels of process abstraction
{visualising data related to activities using either one of three dierent types
of bar charts or a triangle chart (see [5])
{visualising data related to activity pairs can be visualised using coloured arcs
between the two activities (see [7])
the framework was implemented in two plugins for the process mining frame-
work prom. figure 1 shows an example of comparative performance analysis
using this tool.
however, we note that some scenarios are still not well covered by existing
performance analysis techniques and in the remainder of this paper we will dis-
cuss one of these scenarios and present a novel visualisation technique that we
have added to processproler3d to address this issue.
3 problem statement
one issue with existing techniques for process performance analysis is the loss of
context that occurs when performance data are a) localised and b) summarised
as is usually the case with activity duration, throughput time and waiting time
calculations. both problems have the potential to aect our understanding of
performance analysis results and can complicate nding root causes.firstly, the analysis results are currently localised to one point in the process
model. for example, an activity c may be preceded by either activity a or
b. by looking at performance indicators of these activities we cannot tell if
cases that rst executed a on average take longer to execute c than cases that
executed b. so by localising the analysis results per activity we lose the context
of how preceding activities aected the case and how subsequent activities were
impacted.
secondly, the statistical summary of performance indicators by minimum,
median, mean and maximum also means that we are losing context in the re-
sults. it is, for example, hard to tell whether a few extreme cases skewed the
results or what the general distribution of cases is. furthermore, if the same
case executes an activity multiple times, it is impossible to identify dierences
between the individual execution times (e.g. the activity took much time on the
rst execution, but nished really quickly on every following execution). some
absolute indicators, such as the average case runtime at an activity, also get
distorted by loops. consequently, while existing process performance analysis
techniques already provide valuable insights into the execution of a process, ad-
ditional analysis techniques are required to add context to the results of existing
techniques.
4 trajectory visualisation
fig. 2: example of the proposed visualisation for process performance compar-
isons based on case trajectories (variant 3)
we therefore propose a novel visualisation technique inspired by geo-spatial
data visualisations (e.g. [3]) to present performance data in the context of both
history and future execution of a process instance. this visualisation presents
the path of individual cases through a process model, while showing timinginformation in a third dimension, orthogonal to the process model. an example
of this technique can be seen in figure 2.
we construct this visualisation by replaying a token-game on a given petri
net and recording each token move as a line in two dimensions. we then use the
time of each event that triggered the token move to calculate the height of the
start and end point of each line. our implementation provides three dierent
congurations of the trajectory visualisation. the rst variant visualises token
paths from one activity straight to the next activity. the second variant visualises
the token paths from the activity through the place to the next activity. the third
variant visualises the token path from the activity along the edge connecting it to
the place and then along the edge to the next activity. each variant increases the
complexity of the visualisation, but often lines following the model layout more
precisely make it easier to relate them back to the underlying process model and
therefore easier to understand. to further facilitate this, vertical support lines
can be displayed by selecting nodes in the process model, as shown in figure 2.
in addition to the shape of case trajectories, colours can encode additional
information in the visualisation. by default, case trajectories are coloured to
indicate the cohort a case belongs to (see figure 3). however, our implemen-
tation can also colour the trajectory to display relative completion of the case
as a colour gradient. this can facilitate nding bottlenecks in large event logs.
furthermore, the cohort classication can be used to lter the visualisation, by
hiding trajectories belonging to a particular cohort. lastly, the vertical scale of
the visualisation can be changed by clicking on the white frame surrounding the
trajectories and pulling it upwards or downwards. this can make it easier to see
dierences between otherwise densely packed trajectories.
seeing both control-ow and time perspective in one view enables users to
identify interactions between control-ow constructs such as loops and process
execution times. using this technique together with the previously presented
techniques for comparative performance visualisation (see [7]) therefore facili-
tates the understanding of performance analysis results.
fig. 3: trajectory view of a complex event log with colour encoding the cohort
a trajectory belongs to5 conclusion
we have presented processproler3d, a framework that can be used to analyse
and compare the performance of multiple process cohorts. the usefulness of this
framework has previously been demonstrated by analysing two industry data
sets and evaluating the tool with two industry partners [7]. in this paper we
have added a novel visualisation technique, the trajectory visualisation, to this
framework, to address the loss of context in the existing performance analysis
approaches.
the framework is available as a package (called \processproler3d") for the
process mining framework prom. in addition, the complete source code for the
tool including the trajectory visualisation is available in the prom repository4.
a screencast of the tool including the new technique is available at:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ckgbtfk6mxy
6 references
references
1. van der aalst, w.m.p.: process mining: data science in action. springer (2016)
2. bolt, a., de leoni, m., van der aalst, w.m.p., gorissen, p.: exploiting process
cubes, analytic workows and process mining for business process reporting: a case
study in education. in: international symposium on data-driven process discovery
and analysis. pp. 33{47. ceur-ws.org (2015)
3. kraak, m.j.: the space-time cube revisited from a geovisualization perspective. in:
proc. 21st international cartographic conference. pp. 1988{1996 (2003)
4. partington, a., wynn, m., suriadi, s., ouyang, c., karnon, j.: process mining
for clinical processes: a comparative analysis of four australian hospitals. acm
transactions on management information systems 5(4), 19:1{19:18 (jan 2015)
5. pini, a., brown, r., wynn, m.t.: process visualization techniques for multi-
perspective process comparisons. in: bae, j., suriadi, s., wen, l. (eds.) asia pacic
business process management. lecture notes in business information processing,
vol. 219, pp. 183{197. springer, busan, korea (march 2015)
6. suriadi, s., wynn, m.t., ouyang, c., ter hofstede, a.h.m., van dijk, n.j.: un-
derstanding process behaviours in a large insurance company in australia: a case
study. in: salinesi, c., norrie, m.c., pastor, o. (eds.) advanced information systems
engineering, lecture notes in computer science, vol. 7908, pp. 449{464. springer
(2013)
7. wynn, m.t., poppe, e., xu, j., ter hofstede, a.h.m., brown, r.a., pini, a., van der
aalst, w.m.p.: processproler3d: a visualisation framework for log-based process
performance comparison. decision support systems (2017, in press), https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.dss.2017.04.004
4https://svn.win.tue.nl/repos/prom/packages/processproler3d/