business analytics and data science
bichler, m.; heinzl, a.; van der aalst, w.m.p.
published in:
business and information systems engineering
doi:
10.1007/s12599-016-0461-1
published: 01/04/2017
document version
publisher’s pdf, also known as version of record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
please check the document version of this publication:
• a submitted manuscript is the author's version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. there can be important differences
between the submitted version and the official published version of record. people interested in the research are advised to contact the
author for the final version of the publication, or visit the doi to the publisher's website.
• the final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• the final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page numbers.
link to publication
citation for published version (apa):
bichler, m., heinzl, a., & van der aalst, w. m. p. (2017). business analytics and data science: once again?
business and information systems engineering, 59(2), 77-79. doi: 10.1007/s12599-016-0461-1
general rights
copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            • users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            • you may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            • you may freely distribute the url identifying the publication in the public portal ?
take down policy
if you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
download date: 14. jan. 2018editorial
business analytics and data science: once again?
martin bichler •armin heinzl •wil m. p. van der aalst
published online: 20 december 2016
/c211springer fachmedien wiesbaden 2016
1 introduction
‘‘everything has already been said, but not yet by every-
one’’. we wouldn’t be surprised if the title of this editorial
reminds you of this famous quote attributed to karl
valentin. business analytics is a relatively new term and
there does not seem to be an established academic deﬁni-
tion. holsapple et al. ( 2014 ) write, ‘‘a crucial observation,
on which the paper is based, is that ‘the deﬁnition’ of
analytics does not exist’’. they describe business analytics
as ‘‘evidence-based problem recognition and solving that
happen within the context of business situations’’, and also
highlight that mathematical and statistical techniques have
long been studied in business schools under such titles as
operations research and management science, simulation
analysis, econometrics, and financial analysis. however,
their article shows that the availability of large data sets in
business has made these techniques much more important
in all ﬁelds of management.at the same time, data science has become a very
popular term describing an interdisciplinary ﬁeld about
processes and systems to extract knowledge or insights
from data. data science is a broader term, but also closely
related to business analytics. in a recent book by one of
the authors, data science is deﬁned as follows: ‘‘data
science is an interdisciplinary ﬁeld aiming to turn data into
real value. data may be structured or unstructured, big or
small, static or streaming. value may be provided in the
form of predictions, automated decisions, models learned
from data, or any type of data visualization delivering
insights. data science includes data extraction, data
preparation, data exploration, data transformation, storage
and retrieval, computing infrastructures, various types of
mining and learning, presentation of explanations and
predictions, and the exploitation of results taking into
account ethical, social, legal, and business aspects’’ (van
der aalst 2016 ).
dhar ( 2013 ) starts his article asking why we need a new
term and whether data science is different from statistics
and gives an afﬁrmative answer. he mentions new types of
data being analyzed, new methods, and new questions
being asked. clearly, both deﬁnitions are overlapping. both
business analytics and data science want to ‘‘turn data
into value’’.
it is not surprising, that these terms have been adopted
quickly by those in our community who are close to
operations research and the management sciences (or/
ms). data analysis and optimization have always been at
the core of the informs, and the informs information
systems society (iss) is one of the large informs sub-
communities. many sessions at the informs annual
meeting or the conference on information systems and
technology (cist), which is organized by the informs
iss just before the annual meeting every year, devoted tom. bichler ( &)
department of informatics, decision sciences and systems,
technical university of munich (tum), boltzmannstr 3,
85748 munich, germany
e-mail: bichler@in.tum.de
a. heinzl
chair of general management and information systems,
university of mannheim, 68161 mannheim, germany
e-mail: heinzl@uni-mannheim.de
w. m. p. van der aalst
department of mathematics and computer science (mf 7.103),
eindhoven university of technology, po box 513,
5600 mb eindhoven, the netherlands
e-mail: w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tue.nl
123bus inf syst eng 59(2):77–79 (2017)
doi 10.1007/s12599-016-0461-1predictive or prescriptive analytics. but the range topics is
much wider than that.
process mining has become an important direction in
business process management (bpm). about half of thepapers presented at the international conference on busi-
ness process management are about data-driven process
management. a successful track on data science andbusiness analytics has been established at icis in the
recent years, and many papers combining data analysis,
information technology, and optimization are submitted to
our bise department ‘‘computational methods and deci-
sion support systems’’ and the department ‘‘is engineer-ing and technology’’. for the remainder of this editorial
we will only talk about analytics for brevity, and leave the
question open which term may be adopted in which com-munity in the in the future.
as many recent topics in information systems, ana-
lytics is multi-disciplinary. there are colleagues ineconometrics, in machine learning, and operations
research who contribute signiﬁcantly. in this brief edito-
rial, we want to discuss how analytics contributes to ourﬁeld, and how our profession can contribute to develop-
ments in analytics. given the vast amounts of data that we
are collecting, this topic will most likely stay with us for along time and eventually have a signiﬁcant impact on both
our research and teaching.
2 research
internet-based systems generate huge amounts of data,
which allow us to better understand how people interact on
markets or in social media. many new types of informationsystems draw on the availability of data about user
behavior or sensor data about the environment. such
information systems adapt to the users and provide betterways to coordinate. let’s pick a few examples to make the
point.
recommender systems are probably among the most
well-known types of analytics-based information systems.
they collect data about user preferences to then provide
tailor-made recommendations for books, movies, or otherproducts. by now, there is a large body of literature about
mathematical methods such as matrix factorization or
collaborative ﬁltering, which allow for effective recom-mendations. at the same time, there is a growing behav-
ioral literature analyzing the impact of these systems on
human decision making. thus, the topic addresses both,design and user behavior, a combination that was always at
the core of information systems research.
interactive marketing is another ﬁeld which heavily
draws on analytics. real-time bidding (rtb) is a means by
which display advertising is bought and sold on a per-impression basis via auction. with real-time bidding,
advertising buyers bid on an impression and, if the bid is
won, the buyer’s ad is instantly displayed on the pub-
lisher’s site. this is the fastest growing segment in thedigital advertising market and it combines predictive
models to better estimate the preferences and tastes of users
and the bidding in a highly automated fashion. the topicaddresses a wealth of problems ranging from distributed
systems to auction theory, machine learning, and, last but
not least, data privacy!
also, the internet-of-things has led to many new
applications which require data analysis, distributed sys-tems, and optimization to go hand in hand in ever growing
applications. we have all seen case studies on smart
mobility solutions, intelligent ports and transportationsystems, or smart home solutions where sensors commu-
nicate and coordinate with humans in real-time, often with
a substantial increase in economic efﬁciency. consider forexample condition-based maintenance making use of the
analysis of sensors data: maintenance is performed when
analytical techniques suggest that the system is going tofail or that performance is deteriorating.
these are just a few examples. analytics are used in
many other domains ranging from customer journeys, call-centers, and credit rating to stafﬁng, e-government, and
delivery services. moreover, there is no reason to assume
that the trend towards more data and evidence-basedmanagement and analytics-based information systems will
end.
in the bise editorial statement ‘‘information systems
are understood as socio-technical systems comprising
people, tasks, and information technology’’. the above
examples suggest that analytics opens up many new andexciting research questions for our community, eventually
leading to a new class of analytics -based information
systems , which sense their environment and respond to the
users that they ultimately serve. this requires an integrated
view addressing privacy concerns, engineering challenges,
and a thorough ‘‘social science’’ analysis of the impact ofnew systems. in summary, analytics provides many new
opportunities for our ﬁeld and describes an almost natural
progression of many lines of information systems research.
3 teaching
information systems, as it is taught at most universities, is
already well-prepared for the design and analysis of thisnew breed of analytics-based information systems. on the
one hand, information systems programs typically include
topics such as data engineering, data mining, softwareengineering, distributed systems, and operations research,
which are essential for their design.
12378 m. bichler et al.: business analytics and data science: once again?, bus inf syst eng 59(2):77–79 (2017)on the other hand, our ﬁeld is also a social science
a n da ss u c hm o s tc u r r i c u l a have courses on economet-
rics and empirical methods . techniques for causal
inference and discrete choi ce models have always been
important ingredients of a so cial scientist’s education,
and they prove to be incredibly valuable for business
analysts. econometrics and machine learning will beessential elements of new curricula in most schools in
the future, if this is not already the case. overall, the fact
that we address ‘‘design and behavior’’ in our education
can be a signiﬁcant advantage for our students in the job
market and in research.
while our bachelor and master programs are well
positioned, there are many new developments in educa-
tion in analytics. there are so many new bachelor andmaster programs in either business analytics or data
science at various universities that we do not even start to
list speciﬁc programs. the european data scienceacademy ( http://edsa-project.eu/ ) is an eu horizon 2020
funded program providing useful information. for our
ﬁeld, it is important to stay abreast of these newdevelopments.4 conclusion
analytics is not just a short-term trend. the availability of
more and more data from sensor networks or human–computer interaction leads to new types of information
systems in which data analysis plays an important role.
analytics will help us to better understand the environmentand to adapt to the needs of users and organizations, when
we design new systems. it is important to reﬂect this
development also in our curricula. analytics is inherentlylinked with our ﬁeld, and we are looking forward to a
growing number of submissions in this area.
references
dhar v (2013) data science and prediction. commun acm
56(12):64–73
holsapple c, lee-post a, pakath r (2014) a uniﬁed foundation for
business analytics. decis support syst 64c(august):130–141
van der aalst w (2016) process mining: data science in action.
springer, heidelberg
123m. bichler et al.: business analytics and data science: once again?, bus inf syst eng 59(2):77–79 (2017) 79