responsible data science
van der aalst, w.m.p.; bichler, m.; heinzl, a.
published in:
business and information systems engineering
doi:
10.1007/s12599-017-0487-z
published: 01/10/2017
document version
publisher’s pdf, also known as version of record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
please check the document version of this publication:
• a submitted manuscript is the author's version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. there can be important differences
between the submitted version and the official published version of record. people interested in the research are advised to contact the
author for the final version of the publication, or visit the doi to the publisher's website.
• the final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• the final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page numbers.
link to publication
citation for published version (apa):
van der aalst, w. m. p., bichler, m., & heinzl, a. (2017). responsible data science. business and information
systems engineering, 59(5), 311-313. doi: 10.1007/s12599-017-0487-z
general rights
copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            • users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            • you may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            • you may freely distribute the url identifying the publication in the public portal ?
take down policy
if you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
download date: 14. jan. 2018editorial
responsible data science
wil m. p. van der aalst •martin bichler •
armin heinzl
published online: 26 june 2017
/c211springer fachmedien wiesbaden gmbh 2017
1 introduction
an increasing fraction of research reported in bise (business
& information systems engineering) is data-driven. this is
not surprising since torrents of data are vigorously changing
the way we do business, socialize, conduct research, and
govern society (hilbert and lopez 2011 ; manyika et al. 2011 ;
white house 2016 ). data are collected on everything, at every
time, and in every place. the internet of things (iot) is
rapidly expanding, with our homes, cars, and cities becoming
‘‘smart’’ by using the collected data in novel ways. these
developments are also changing the way scientiﬁc research is
performed. model-driven approaches are supplemented with
data-driven approaches. for example, genomics and evi-
dence-based medicine are revolutionizing the understanding
and treatment of diseases. from an epistemological point of
view, data-driven approaches follow the logic of the new
experimentalism (mayo 1996 ; chalmers 2013 )i nw h i c h
knowledge is derived from experimental observations, not
theory. information systems which exploit the combination ofdata availability and powerful data science techniques dra-
matically improve our lives by enabling new services and
products, while improving their efﬁciency and quality. how-
ever, there are also great concerns about the use of data (van
der aalst 2016a ,b). increasingly, customers, patients, and
other stakeholders are concerned about irresponsible data use.
automated data decisions may be unfair or non-transparent.
conﬁdential data may be shared unintentionally or abused by
third parties. each step in the ‘‘data science pipeline’ ’ (from
raw data to insights and knowledge) may create inaccuracies,
e.g., if the data used to learn a model reﬂects existing social
biases, the algorithm is likely to incorporate these biases.
these concerns could lead to resistance against the large-scale
use of data and make it impossible to reap the beneﬁts of data
science. rather than to avoid the use of data altogether, we
strongly believe that data science techniques, infrastructures
and approaches need be made responsible by design. over the
last year the ﬁrst author has been leading a dutch initiative
called responsible data science (rds), cf. http://www.
responsibledatascience.org/ . in the context of rds, there are
research projects and regular meetings to discuss new ways to
make data science more responsible. we believe that the
insights obtained from these discussions are also relevant for
the bise community. the data-driven nature of today’s
(business) information systems makes it essential to incor-
porate safeguards against irresponsible data use already in the
requirements and design phases.
2 fact: fairness, accuracy, conﬁdentiality,
and transparency
responsible data science centers around four challenging
questions (van der aalst 2016a ; responsible data science
initiative 2016 ):prof. dr. ir. w. m. p. van der aalst ( &)
department of mathematics and computer science (mf 7.103),
eindhoven university of technology, po box 513,
5600 mb eindhoven, the netherlands
e-mail: w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tue.nl
prof. dr. m. bichler
department of informatics, decision sciences & systems,
technical university of munich (tum), boltzmannstr 3,
85748 munich, germany
e-mail: bichler@in.tum.de
prof. dr. a. heinzl
chair of general management and information systems,
university of mannheim, 68161 mannheim, germany
e-mail: heinzl@uni-mannheim.de
123bus inf syst eng 59(5):311–313 (2017)
doi 10.1007/s12599-017-0487-z•q1 fairness: data science without prejudice - how to
avoid unfair conclusions even if they are true?
•q2 accuracy: data science without guesswork - how to
answer questions with a guaranteed level of accuracy?
•q3 conﬁdentiality: data science that ensures conﬁden-
tiality - how to answer questions without revealing
secrets?
•q4 transparency: data science that provides trans-
parency - how to clarify answers so that they become
indisputable?
the terms fairness, accuracy, conﬁdentiality, and
transparency form the acronym fact. this should not be
confused with the well-known fair principles (findable,
accessible, interoperable, and re-usable). whereas fairlooks at practical issues related to the sharing and distri-
bution of data, fact focuses more on the foundational
scientiﬁc challenges.
data science approaches learn from training data while
maximizing an objective (e.g., the percentage of correctly
classiﬁed instances). however, this does not imply that theoutcome is fair. the training data may be biased or
minorities may be underrepresented or individually dis-
criminated. even if sensitive attributes are omitted, mem-bers of certain groups may still be systematically rejected.
proﬁling may lead to further stigmatization of certain
groups. therefore, approaches are needed to detect unfair
decisions (e.g., unintended discrimination) and to ﬁnd ways
to ensure fairness .
the abundance of data suggests that we should let the
data ‘‘speak for themselves’’. data science makes this
possible, but at the same time analyses of data sets - largeor small - often produce inaccurate results. in general, it is
challenging to ‘‘let the data speak’’ in a reliable manner. if
enough hypotheses are tested, one will eventually be truefor the sample data used. if we have one response variable
(e.g., ‘‘will someone conduct a terrorist attack’’) and many
predictor variables (‘‘eye color’’, ‘‘high school mathgrade’’, ‘‘ﬁrst car brand’’, etc.), then it is likely that just by
accident a combination of predictor variables explains the
response variable for a given data set. multiple testingproblems are well-known in statistical inference, but often
underestimated. data science approaches should not just
present results or make predictions, but also explicitlyprovide meta-information on the accuracy of the output.
data science heavily relies on the sharing of data
(dwork 2011 ). if individuals do not trust the ‘‘data science
pipeline’’ and worry about conﬁdentiality, they will not
share their data. the goal should not be to prevent data
from being distributed and gathered, but to exploit data in asafe and controlled manner. conﬁdentiality questions need
to be addressed both from a security perspective (poly-
morphic encryption and pseudonymization) and a legal/ethical perspective (e.g., perceptions and effects on the
behavior of individuals). the focus should not be on cir-
cumventing the sharing of data, but on innovative
approaches like conﬁdentiality-preserving analysis tech-niques (e.g., techniques that work under a strict privacy
budget).
data science can only be effective if people trust the
results and are able to correctly interpret the outcomes.
data science should not be viewed as a black box that
magically transforms data into value. the journey from raw
data to meaningful inferences involves multiple steps and
actors, thus accountability and comprehensibility areessential for transparency .
consider for example the recent attention and enthusi-
asm for deep learning. breakthroughs make it possible tomake better decisions; however, the neural networks used
by the deep learning approach cannot be understood by
humans. hence, they serve as a black box that apparentlymakes good decisions, but cannot rationalize them. in
several domains, this is unacceptable.
in most situations, causal inference is the goal of data
analysis in business, but often enough correlation is con-
fused with causality. econometricians are well aware of
this and have developed techniques for causal inferencewhen a randomized controlled trial, the gold standard of
causal inference, is not possible. propensity score matching
or inverse probability-weighed regression adjustment arejust two approaches developed to combat the selection bias
in observational data. while these techniques address the
selection bias, their outcomes might still be far away fromthe results one would obtained with a randomized con-
trolled trial as was recently illustrated by gordon et al.
(2016 ). this can lead to wrong interpretations of data and
entirely spurious conclusions.
simpson’s paradox is another nice example to show how
easy it is to give false advice even in the presence of ‘‘big’’data. the paradox describes a phenomenon in which a
trend appears in different groups of data but disappears or
reverses when these groups are combined. it is frighteningto see data scientists nowadays who seem not to be aware
of the many pitfalls in the modeling of data. it takes years
of training to acquire the skill set necessary to draw solidstatistical inferences. without this training, the likelihood
of young and ambitious ‘data scientists’ making false
claims is high.
3 designing fact-based information systems
many consider (big) data as the ‘‘new oil’ ’ which can be
reﬁned into new forms of ‘‘energy’ ’: insights, diagnostics,predictions, and automated decisions. however, the fact
123312 w. m. p. van der aalst et al.: responsible data science, bus inf syst eng 59(5):311–313 (2017)challenges just described show that the careless transfor-
mation of ‘ ‘new oil’ ’ (data) into ‘‘new energy’’ (data science
results) may negatively impact citizens, patients, customers,
and employees. systematic discrimination based on data,invasions of privacy, non-transparent life-changing deci-
sions, and inaccurate conclusions can be viewed as new
forms of ‘‘pollution’’. in van der aalst ( 2016a )t h et e r m
‘‘green data science’ ’ was coined for cutting-edge solutions
that enable individuals, organizations, and society to beneﬁt
from widespread data availability while ensuring fairness,
accuracy, conﬁdentiality, and transparency. note that
‘‘green data science’’ does not refer to making data centersmore energy efﬁcient: it is about the possibly negative side
effects that data may have on people’s lives.
there might be an opportunity for europe when it comes
to green data science. consider an ‘‘internet minute’’
(james 2016 ) with approximately:
•1,000,000 tinder swipes,
•3,500,000 google searches,
•100,000 siri answers,
•850,000 dropbox uploads,
•900,000 facebook logins,
•450,000 tweets sent,
•7,000,000 snaps received,
•etc.
all of the above activity is governed by software and
hardware of us-based companies. in some countries this
raises great concerns about competitiveness, privacy pro-
tection, etc. in the world of data, a few organizations seemto rule the world. spotify (a swedish) company is one of
the rare exceptions (i.e., a successful non-us-based orga-
nization signiﬁcantly contributing to today’s internet traf-ﬁc). however, the stricter laws in europe can also create a
competitive advantage. on 14 april 2016, the eu parlia-
ment approved the general data protection regulation(gdpr) which aims to strengthen and unify data protection
for individuals within the eu. this may provide a boost for
new ways of using data without the ‘‘pollution’’ describedbefore. however, this opportunity only exists if policy
makers really want to invest. it is not sufﬁcient to just bring
in legislation, we also need technological breakthroughs.
4 responsible business and information systems
engineering
the bise community should play an active role in making
our next generation of information systems ‘‘green’’.already during the design and requirements phases one
should take into account questions related to fairness,
accuracy, conﬁdentiality, and transparency (fact). con-
sider today’s customer relationship management (crm)systems, enterprise resource planning (erp) systems,
hospital information systems (his), learning management
systems (lms), etc. how can we make the next generationof these systems green? for example, should we add fact
elements to our modeling languages? how can fact
elements be embedded in our requirements? we hope to
see future contributions to bise addressing these
questions!
references
chalmers af (2013) what is this thing called science? an assessment
of the nature and status of science and its methods. mcgraw hill,new york
dwork c (2011) a ﬁrm foundation for private data analysis. commun
acm 54(1):86–95
gordon b, zettelmeyer f, bhargava n, chapsky d (2016) a
comparison of approaches to advertising measurement: evidencefrom big ﬁeld experiments at facebook. white paper, kellog
school of management, northwestern university, evanston
hilbert m, lopez p (2011) the world’s technological capacity to
store, communicate, and compute information. science
332(6025):60–65
james j (2016) domo blog: data never sleeps 4.0. https://www.domo.
com/blog/data-never-sleeps-4-0/ . accessed 11 june 2017
manyika j, chui m, brown b, bughin j, dobbs r, roxburgh c, byers
a (2011) big data: the next frontier for innovation, competition,
and productivity. mckinsey global institute, new york
mayo dg (1996) error and growth of experimental knowledge.
university of chicago press, chicago
responsible data science initiative (2016) responsible data science.
http://www.responsibledatascience.org/ . accessed 11 june 2017
van der aalst w (2016a) green data science: using big data in an
‘‘environmentally friendly’’ manner. in: camp o, cordeiro j
(eds) proceedings of the 18th international conference onenterprise information systems (iceis 2016), science andtechnology publications, pp 9–21
van der aalst w (2016b) process mining: data science in action.
springer, heidelberg
white house (2016) artiﬁcial intelligence, automation, and the
economy. (report released by the executive ofﬁce of the
president in december 2016). https://obamawhitehouse.archives.
gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/ﬁles/documents/artiﬁcial-intelligence-automation-economy.pdf . accessed 11 june 2017
123w. m. p. van der aalst et al.: responsible data science, bus inf syst eng 59(5):311–313 (2017) 313