mining resource profiles from event logs
pika, a.; leyer, m.; wynn, m.t.; fidge, c.j.; ter hofstede, a.h.m.; van der aalst, w.m.p.
published in:
acm transactions on management information systems
doi:
10.1145/3041218
published: 01/03/2017
document version
publisher’s pdf, also known as version of record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
please check the document version of this publication:
• a submitted manuscript is the author's version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. there can be important differences
between the submitted version and the official published version of record. people interested in the research are advised to contact the
author for the final version of the publication, or visit the doi to the publisher's website.
• the final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• the final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page numbers.
link to publication
citation for published version (apa):
pika, a., leyer, m., wynn, m. t., fidge, c. j., ter hofstede, a. h. m., & van der aalst, w. m. p. (2017). mining
resource profiles from event logs. acm transactions on management information systems, 8(1), 1-30. [1]. doi:
10.1145/3041218
general rights
copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            • users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            • you may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            • you may freely distribute the url identifying the publication in the public portal ?
take down policy
if you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
download date: 14. jan. 20181
mining resource proﬁles from event logs
anastasiia pika , queensland university of technology
michael leyer ,u n i v e r s i t yo fr o s t o c k
moe t. wynn and colin j. fidge , queensland university of technology
arthur h. m. ter hofstede , queensland university of technology and eindhoven
university of technology
wil m. p . van der aalst , eindhoven university of technology and queensland
university of technology
in most business processes, several activities need to be executed by human resources and cannot be fully
automated. to evaluate resource performance and identify best practices as well as opportunities for im-
provement, managers need objective information about resource behaviors. companies often use information
systems to support their processes, and these systems record information about process execution in event
logs. we present a framework for analyzing and evaluating resource behavior through mining such event
logs. the framework provides (1) a method for extracting descriptive information about resource skills,
utilization, preferences, productivity, and collaboration patterns; (2) a method for analyzing relationships
between different resource behaviors and outcomes; and (3) a method for evaluating the overall resource
productivity, tracking its changes over time, and comparing it to the productivity of other resources. to
demonstrate the applicability of our framework, we apply it to analyze employee behavior in an australian
company and evaluate its usefulness by a survey among industry managers.
ccs concepts: rinformation systems →information systems applications; •information systems
applications →decision support systems;
additional key words and phrases: resource proﬁle, event log, mining resource behavior, evidence-based
performance evaluation
acm reference format:
anastasiia pika, michael leyer, moe t. wynn, colin j. fidge, arthur h. m. ter hofstede, and wil m. p. van
der aalst. 2017. mining resource proﬁles from event logs. acm trans. manage. inf. syst. 8, 1, article 1
(march 2017), 30 pages.
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3041218
1. introduction
employees are almost always involved in the execution of business processes, and
they play a fundamental role in the creation of value in an organization. to better
this research was funded by the “risk-aware business process management” project (arc dp110100091),
for which ethical clearance was obtained (approval no. 1100000288). human participants were involved
in the evaluation of the project results (by completing a survey), and ethical clearance for conducting the
survey was obtained (approval no. 1400000420). we also used an anonymized dataset in our case study, so
this component of the research was exempt from ethical review in conformity with the national statement
on ethical conduct in human research (2007; https://www.nhmrc.gov.au/guidelines-publications/e72).
authors’ addresses: a. pika (corresponding author), m. t. wynn, c. j. fidge, and a. h. m. ter hofstede,
queensland university of technology, 2 george st, 4000, brisbane, australia; emails: {a.pika, m.wynn,
c.ﬁdge, a.terhofstede}@qut.edu.au; m. leyer, university of rostock, ulmenstr. 69, 18057, rostock, germany;
email: michael.leyer@uni-rostock.de; w. m. p. van der aalst, eindhoven university of technology, po box
513, nl-5600 mb, eindhoven, the netherlands; email: w.m.p.v.d.aalst@tue.nl.
permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted
without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that
copies show this notice on the ﬁrst page or initial screen of a display along with the full citation. copyrights for
components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored. abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, to redistribute to lists, or to use any component of this
work in other works requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. permissions may be requested from
publications dept., acm, inc., 2 penn plaza, suite 701, new york, ny 10121-0701 usa, fax +1 (212)
869-0481, or permissions@acm.org.
c/circlecopyrt2017 acm 2158-656x/2017/03-art1 $15.00
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3041218
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.1:2 a. pika et al.
understand areas of improvement of resource1and process performance, managers
need objective information about the working behaviors of teams and individual em-
ployees. often managers do not have such information, and they have to make decisions
based on their subjective judgments [manoharan et al. 2009]. this may result in inad-
equate performance appraisal systems, ineffective employee development strategies,
and missed opportunities for performance improvement. for example, some teams may
be overloaded, or important activities may be assigned to inefﬁcient resources. iden-
tiﬁcation of such patterns of resource behavior can help improve individual employee
and team performance and overall process performance.
given this background, the research question that emerges is: how can resource
behavior be analyzed in an objective way? business processes are often supported by
information systems that record information about process executions in event logs.
although resources play an important role in process executions, there are few meth-
ods currently available that allow organizations to extract knowledge about resource
behavior from event logs, with some notable exceptions [song and van der aalst 2008;
van der aalst et al. 2005; nakatumba and van der aalst 2010; ly et al. 2006], but these
focus on organizational structures and do not consider changes in resource behavior
over time (with the exception of the work of nakatumba and van der aalst [2010], in
which changes in resource workload are considered). in a dynamic world, resources,
as well as other process artifacts, change, and “it is important to be able to get [their]
documented history” [beheshti et al. 2016]. for example, the inﬂuence of contextual
factors (e.g., holiday season, weather) on the efﬁciency of resources can be observed
over time [leyer 2011]. in addition, resource planning can be described as a dynamic
decision system that is characterized by delays between actions and results [sterman
1989]. if a new policy to guide resources in their work is set up, it is very likely that
the effect in terms of efﬁciency can be observed with a delay, but the time of the delay
is typically unknown. thus, we present a framework for analyzing resource behavior
through event log mining that allows tracking changes over time. figure 1 depicts the
main idea of our framework.
analyzing resource behavior can be seen from different perspectives with measures
being structured according to the most relevant aspects [de leeuw and van den berg
2011]. as we focus our analysis on the actors (resources) involved in undertaking
activities within a process, three perspectives appear to be relevant [sawhney and
chason 2005; white et al. 1999; de leeuw and van den berg 2011]:
—the resource actions (i.e., what the resource has been doing). this is a descriptive
view of resource behavior. this leads to research question 1: how can the behaviors
of resources be identiﬁed?
—the effect of resource behaviors . this covers the relationship between resource be-
haviors and outcomes and is thus a more analytic perspective. this leads to research
question 2: how can the effects of resource behaviors be quantiﬁed?
—evaluation and comparison of resource productivity . here, a comparison is made
with other resources over different time periods. this leads to research question 3:
how can the overall productivity of resources be evaluated?
all three questions rely on the same input data but take different perspectives in
analyzing resource behavior. as such, the analyses can be performed independently of
each other. although the results are related from a content point of view, the separation
into the three perspectives allows a clear separation of the speciﬁc questions of interest
and acknowledges that different methods are required to address the questions.
1in this article, we use the term resource as a generic term for human resources ; it can refer to an individual
employee or a group of employees (e.g., a role or a team).
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.mining resource proﬁles from event logs 1:3
fig. 1. mining resource proﬁles (team or individual) from event logs.
in our earlier work [pika et al. 2014], we presented a framework that allowed us
to answer the ﬁrst question by analyzing resource behavior indicators (rbis) in the
following categories of resource behavior: skills, utilization, preferences, productivity,
and collaboration. however, it did not allow us to investigate the effects of this behavior,
and it did not provide a means for evaluating overall resource productivity. in this
article, we present an extended framework that includes a new method for investigating
whether or not any relationships exist between given resource behaviors and outcomes
by analyzing an event log (e.g., whether or not employees complete more work when
they multitask) (section 3.3). the proposed method is based on regression analysis and
allows us to investigate relationships from the following three process perspectives:
case, task, and time. another technical contribution of this article is a new method
for evaluating resource productivity by analyzing event logs (section 3.4). the method
uses the data envelopment analysis (dea) technique [bogetoft and otto 2011] for
this purpose. it allows us to compare the productivity of different resources (teams or
individual employees) and to track productivity evolution over time. the framework
is based on a set of predeﬁned measures and also allows users to deﬁne their own
indicators. we present the results of a new case study in which our framework was
applied to analyze resource behaviors in an australian company (section 4.1) and
the results of a new survey that evaluates the usefulness of the framework among
managers (section 4.2).
2. related and previous work
in this section, we ﬁrst introduce business processes and human resource behavior,
then discuss process mining focusing on techniques for extracting human resource
behavior. we conclude the section with a discussion of resource benchmarking.
business processes . a business process is a coordinated sequence of activities that
jointly realize a business goal and are performed “in an organizational and techni-
cal environment” [weske 2007]. people are considered a core element of business
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.1:4 a. pika et al.
process management (bpm) [rosemann and vom brocke 2015]. business processes
whose executions depend on knowledge workers performing knowledge-intensive tasks
are referred to as knowledge-intensive processes [di ciccio et al. 2015]. knowledge-
intensive business services “have grown exponentially over the last three decades”
[freel 2016] and “have been the most dynamic component” in developed economies
[wirtz and lovelock 2016]. despite knowledge workers playing a prominent role in
modern organizations, the bpm community traditionally provided “minor emphasis of
collaboration aspects” [di ciccio et al. 2015].
human resource behavior . process outcomes depend on human resource behavior,
which is considered to be the “most important element that can affect project success”
[thevendran and mawdesley 2004]. human behavior can be complex, as people “seek
to promote their utility, through advancing their interests, preferences and ideas,” and
their decisions are inﬂuenced by their social contexts [leftwich 2015]. resource be-
havior can also evolve over time [beheshti et al. 2016]. hence, human performance
planning and measurement can become a challenging task, which is typically han-
dled by human resource management departments [espinilla et al. 2013; peretz and
fried 2012]. traditional performance evaluation approaches often suffer from “lack
of objectivity, prejudice or halo errors” [espinilla et al. 2013], and they often have a
“narrow, or uni-dimensional, focus” [neely et al. 2000]. one way to overcome the lack
of objectivity is to base performance evaluation on “the opinion of different groups of
reviewers who socialize with evaluated employees” [espinilla et al. 2013]. various au-
thors have proposed performance evaluation frameworks that are based on “a balanced
set of measures”; they “suggest some areas in which measures of performance might
be useful, but provide little guidance on how the appropriate measures can be identi-
ﬁed” [neely et al. 2000]. such performance measures can be deﬁned on an aggregate
level, namely for teams, departments, or a company [nudurupati et al. 2011], or for
individual employees [neely et al. 2005; thompson and goodale 2006; dulebohn and
johnson 2013].
process mining . business processes are not always executed as expected “due to the
high variability that may affect operational processes in real world scenarios” [ceravolo
et al. 2016]. processes are often supported by information systems that record infor-
mation about their executions in event logs [van der aalst 2016; ceravolo et al. 2016].
process mining aims to extract knowledge about business processes from such event
logs [van der aalst 2016]. early process mining techniques were aimed at discovering
process models from event logs; later on, process mining algorithms were developed
that also support the discovery of other process perspectives (e.g., organizational, case,
or time perspectives) [van der aalst 2016]. some aspects of our framework were in-
spired by existing process mining approaches. in our own earlier work, we presented
process risk indicators for the identiﬁcation of case delays [pika et al. 2013a, 2013b].
we showed that a high resource workload or the involvement of certain resources in
a case can contribute to case delays. de leoni et al. [2014] proposed a general frame-
work for correlating process characteristics linked to events by applying decision tree
analysis. van der aalst [2013] proposed the notion of process cubes, whereby events
can be “organized using different dimensions” such as time windows or event or case
types. bose et al. [2013] proposed a framework for detecting changes in processes. pika
et al. [2016] presented a method for evaluating and predicting overall process risk
that considers process evolution. however, the preceding approaches focus on business
processes rather than resources.
extracting human resource behavior . several methods for extracting knowledge
about some aspects of resource behavior from event logs have been proposed in the
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.mining resource proﬁles from event logs 1:5
process mining ﬁeld: song and van der aalst [2008] proposed techniques for extract-
ing organizational models; song and van der aalst [2008] and van der aalst et al.
[2005] presented a method for extracting social networks from event logs; huang et al.
[2012] proposed some measures for resource preference, availability, competence, and
cooperation; and nakatumba and van der aalst [2010] presented a method that in-
vestigates the effect of resource workload on service times. several approaches have
been devised that use event logs to derive resource allocation mechanisms: liu et al.
[2012] proposed an approach that mines resource allocation rules from event logs by
applying a data mining algorithm, cabanillas et al. [2013] proposed an approach for
prioritizing potential task performers based on their preferences, kumar et al. [2013]
devised a model that considers compatibility between resources when assigning tasks
and a technique for learning resource compatibility from logs, and ly et al. [2006]
presented a method for mining task assignment rules based on decision tree learning.
these approaches focus on organizational structures, few speciﬁc measures, or resource
allocation mechanisms (rather than different aspects of employee behavior), and they
do not consider changes of resource behavior over time.
resource benchmarking . we adopted dea [bogetoft and otto 2011] to evaluate and
compare resource productivity. dea is a popular efﬁciency evaluation and benchmark-
ing technique based on linear programming that is often used in operations research
to compare the efﬁciency of companies [bogetoft and otto 2011], departments or com-
pany functions [thanassoulis 1995; tavakoli and shirouyehzad 2013], and business
processes [dohmen and leyer 2010]. a few works describe case studies in which dea
was applied to measure the efﬁciency of employees [manoharan et al. 2009; wagner
et al. 2003; koch-rogge et al. 2014]. however, these case studies did not use event log
data; they used data that was collected from different sources, manually preprocessed,
and transformed into a form suitable for dea analysis.
3. framework
our framework consists of three modules, as depicted in figure 1, with each module
tackling the three research questions introduced in section 1. the goal of the ﬁrst
module, called analyzing resource behavior , is to discover what resources have been
doing—that is, to gain objective information about their skills, utilization, working pref-
erences, productivity, and collaboration patterns (research question 1 in section 1).
the goal of the second module, called quantifying the outcome of resource behavior ,
is to help managers to better understand the effects of resource behaviors on differ-
ent process outcomes—for example, to check if the resource workload is affecting the
duration of tasks executed by the resource or the quality of the work (research ques-
tion 2 in section 1). our aim is not to learn whether or not certain resource behaviors
are associated with particular outcomes. instead, we aim to provide a method and
a supporting tool that allows managers to observe what relationships exist between
given resource behaviors and outcomes. finally, the goal of the evaluating resource
productivity module is to provide a method for evaluating the overall productivity
of a resource by comparing it to the productivity of other resources and tracking its
evolution over time (research question 3 in section 1). resources are often involved
in multiple activities with different levels of complexity. looking separately at each
task would be prohibitively time consuming. managers would beneﬁt from a method
that can automatically evaluate the productivity of a resource considering different
resource inputs and outputs. they can further explore some resources of interest (e.g.,
overperforming or underperforming) and look at individual indicators to investigate
resource behaviors and their effects in detail (using other modules of the framework).
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.1:6 a. pika et al.
fig. 2. inputs and outputs of the framework for mining resource proﬁles from event logs.
figure 2 depicts inputs and outputs of our framework. an input to the three modules
is an event log that we discuss in detail in section 3.1. another input to the framework
are resource behavior measures. these are different for the three modules, and we
discuss them in sections 3.2 through 3.4. we propose several measures of resource
behavior and also provide an interface that allows users to deﬁne their own measures.
outputs of the framework are three different types of analysis visualized by corre-
sponding charts. these will be discussed in sections 3.2 through 3.4. in the following
sections, we ﬁrst describe deﬁnitions of the basic concepts that are used in the frame-
work speciﬁcations. we then describe in detail the three modules of our framework.
3.1. deﬁnitions
a key input to our framework is an event log that captures information about process
executions.2letebe the set of all events; an event log el is a set of events (i.e.,
el⊆e). events can have different attributes. we assume that each event has at least
the following attributes (referred to here as basic attributes): caseid ,task ,type ,time ,
and resource . we assume that start and complete event types are always recorded, and
other event types (e.g., create ) may also be recorded. we can treat an event log as a
relation whose relation scheme is speciﬁed by the set of event attributes.
letcbe the set of all cases; a case log cl is a set of cases (i.e., cl⊆c). similarly,
cases are characterized by different attributes. a case is uniquely identiﬁable by the
case attribute caseid . a case log can also be treated as a relation whose relation scheme
is speciﬁed by the set of case attributes.
2the framework implementation takes as input an xes event log, a standard format for event log data
(http://www.xes-standard.org/).
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.mining resource proﬁles from event logs 1:7
fig. 3. example of an event log.
the value of attribute aof case cis denoted as ca, whereas eadenotes the value of
attribute aof event e. for example, ecaseid is the case identiﬁer of event e∈e.
events and cases can have other attributes (e.g., cost oroutcome ). as examples of
such nonbasic attributes, we use the event attributes sum and creator and the case
attributes case type and feedback .
figure 3 depicts an example of an event log that contains ﬁve events with ﬁve basic
attributes and attribute case type. we can see, for example, that in an urgent case with
identiﬁer “111,” anne started task “request information” at 10:15 on 10/02/2006. note
that in this example attribute resource refers to individual employees, but it can also
refer to a role or a team.
we also derive from the basic event log the case attributes case_duration (the time dif-
ference between the timestamps of the last and ﬁrst event of a case) and case_resources
(the number of resources that were involved in a case). the following event attributes
are derived from the basic event log: task_duration (the time difference between the
corresponding activity’s3complete and start events), workload (the number of task in-
stances that were started but not completed by a resource involved in an event before
the moment of event execution), and workload_duration (the time period during which
the resource’s workload did not change). for example, if a resource starts executing
task aat time t1and then starts another task at time t2and task ais not completed
yet at t2, the resource’s workload at time t2is 1 and the workload duration is t2−t1.
for each event, we also create the attribute eventid , which is a unique identiﬁer of the
event. if any of these derivable event or case attributes are recorded in a log, users may
choose to use the log’s values instead of deriving them from the basic attributes.
let rbe a set of resources, aa set of activities, t1and t2the beginning and the end
of a given time slot, and ra given resource. next, we deﬁne the functions that are later
used in deﬁnitions of our methods:
—events completed during a given time slot [t1,t2) :
ect(t1,t2)/defines{e∈el|etime≥t1∧etime <t2∧etype=‘complete’ }
—events in which a given resource was involved during a given time slot :
etr(t1,t2,r)/defines{e∈el|etime≥t1∧etime <t2∧eresource =r}
—events completed by a given resource during a given time slot :
ectr(t1,t2,r)/definesect(t1,t2)∩etr(t1,t2,r)
—cases completed during a given time slot :
cct(t1,t2)/defines{c∈c|∃e∈ect(t1,t2)[ecaseid=ccaseid ]∧
∄e/prime∈el[e/prime
caseid=ccaseid∧e/prime
time >t2]}
—cases in which a given resource was involved :
cr(r)/defines{c∈c|∃e∈el[ecaseid=ccaseid∧eresource =r]}
3in this article, we use the terms task and activity interchangeably.
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.1:8 a. pika et al.
fig. 4. categories of resource behavior and examples of rbis.
—cases in which a given resource was involved during a given time slot :
ctr(t1,t2,r)/defines{c∈c|∃e∈etr(t1,t2,r)[ecaseid=ccaseid ]}.
3.2. analyzing resource behavior
our ﬁrst goal is to be able to answer research question 1: what have resources been
doing? to extract descriptive information about different aspects of resource behavior,
we follow three main steps: (1) deﬁning the rbis, (2) extracting the rbi time series
from the event logs, and (3) analyzing the rbi time series.
3.2.1. deﬁning rbis. the kinds of resource behavior that managers may wish to analyze
depend on the reasons for the analysis and the particular context. there may be many
indicators of interest in a speciﬁc situation [neely et al. 2005]. we refer to a collection
of rbis that are relevant in a particular context as a resource proﬁle . based on the
literature, we propose the following categories of resource behavior [pika et al. 2014]:
(1) skills [thompson and goodale 2006] (what can a resource do?)
(2) utilization [neely et al. 2005] (what is a resource actually doing?)
(3) preferences [huang et al. 2012; van der aalst 2010, 2015] (what working behavior
does a resource often demonstrate?)
(4) productivity [murphy 1999] (how good is a resource at what it4does?)
(5) collaboration [van der aalst et al. 2005; huang et al. 2012] (how does a resource
work with other resources?)
we deﬁne a set of rbis in each category (figure 4). many of our predeﬁned rbis
can be extracted from basic event logs, whereas others require additional information
(e.g., cost or feedback) to be recorded. furthermore, some rbis are generic, and others
are only relevant in speciﬁc contexts; rbi values may be absolute or relative. we also
provide an interface that allows users to deﬁne their own rbis. for example, a manager
may be interested in conformance and may wish to check whether a resource performs
a task that should not be performed. in the remainder of this section, we discuss rbis
in each of the categories of resource behavior and provide formal deﬁnitions for a small
selection of the rbis. let rbi n(t1,t2,r,[p1...pn]) denote the value of an rbi nduring
a given time slot, t1tot2, for resource rand for an optional set of other parameters
p1...pn. for example, an optional parameter can refer to cost, customer feedback, or
product category.
1.skills: what can a resource do? resources have different capabilities, and they
acquire new skills at a different pace. knowledge about resource capabilities can help
in resource scheduling [huang et al. 2012; thompson and goodale 2006] and resource
development planning. we assume that a resource is capable of performing those types
of activities that it has performed in the past; hence, rbis in this category reﬂect
4in this article, we use the pronoun itwhen referring to resources, as the term resource can refer to an
employee or a group of employees (e.g., a role or a team).
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.mining resource proﬁles from event logs 1:9
only “demonstrated” skills. some example rbis in this category include the number
of distinct tasks completed by a resource, the fraction of distinct tasks completed by a
resource with respect to the total number of distinct tasks completed, the number of
completions of an activity with a given property by a resource, the fraction of comple-
tions of an activity with a given property by a resource with respect to the total number
of completions of the activity with the given property, the number of case completions
with a given property in which a resource was involved, the fraction of case comple-
tions with a given property in which a resource was involved with respect to the total
number of case completions with the given property, and the fraction of completions of
a given activity by a resource with respect to the total number of activity completions
by the resource.
rbi 1.1. distinct activities : the number of distinct activities completed by a given
resource, r, during a given time slot, t1tot2. this rbi is relevant in those working
environments where resources learn new skills and get involved in more tasks over
time.
distinct activities (t1,t2,r)/defines|{task∈a|∃e∈ectr(t1,t2,r)[etask=task]}|
rbi 1.2. case types : the fraction of cases with a given value, p, of case attribute
case_type completed during a given time slot, [ t1,t2), in which a given resource, r,
was involved with respect to the number of cases completed during time slot [ t1,t2)
in which the resource was involved (requires attribute case_type to be recorded
in the log). looking at the types of cases processed by a resource, managers can
discover, for example, that the resource is only processing cases related to a speciﬁc
product or that it is getting involved in more complex cases over time.
case types (t1,t2,r,p)/defines
|{c∈cct(t1,t2)∩cr(r)|ccase type=p}|/|cct(t1,t2)∩cr(r)|
rbi 1.3. activity frequency : the fraction of completions of a given activity, a,b ya
given resource, r, during a given time slot, [ t1,t2), with respect to the total number of
activity completions by resource rduring time slot [ t1,t2). managers can discover, for
example, those activities that a resource frequently executes (hence, the activities in
which the resource is more experienced) and those that it executes only occasionally.
activity frequency (t1,t2,r,a)/defines
|{e∈ectr(t1,t2,r)|etask=a}|/|ectr(t1,t2,r)|
2. utilization: what is a resource actually doing? utilization rbis measure how
active a resource is without looking into the quality of its outputs. these indicators are
inspired by measures in manufacturing (e.g., the number of units produced) [neely et al.
2005]. users can look at the number of activity instances completed by a resource, the
fraction of activity instances completed by a resource with respect to the total number
of activity instances completed, the number of completions of a given activity by a
resource, the number of completed cases in which a resource was involved, the fraction
of completed cases in which a resource was involved with respect to the total number
of cases completed, or the average resource workload.
rbi 2.1. activity completions : the number of activity instances completed by a
given resource during a given time slot.
activity completions (t1,t2,r)/defines|ectr(t1,t2,r)|
rbi 2.2. number of case completions : the number of cases completed during a given
time slot in which a given resource was involved.
case completions number (t1,t2,r)/defines|cct(t1,t2)∩cr(r)|
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.1:10 a. pika et al.
rbi 2.3. fraction of case completions : the fraction of cases completed during a given
time slot in which a given resource was involved with respect to the total number
of cases completed during the time slot.
case completions fraction (t1,t2,r)/defines|cct(t1,t2)∩cr(r)|/|cct(t1,t2)|
rbi 2.4. average workload : the average number of activities started by a given
resource but not completed at a moment in time. we do not consider the resource’s
working hours, and hence this rbi only yields a rough estimation of the resource’s
average workload.
average workload (t1,t2,r)/defines/summationtext
e∈etr(t1,t2,r)eworkload ∗eworkload duration //summationtext
e∈etr(t1,t2,r)eworkload duration
3. preferences: what working behavior does a resource often demonstrate? resources
have different working styles that may affect their performance [van der aalst 2010,
2015; huang et al. 2012]. we may learn about resources’ preferences by checking if
they often multitask, execute only similar tasks or take risks by performing a mul-
titude of tasks, perform more work during certain weekdays, or reassign tasks to
others.
rbi 3.1. multitasking : the fraction of active time during which a given resource is
involved in more than one activity with respect to the resource’s active time. we
do not consider the resource’s working hours, and we assume that the resource is
working on all tasks that they started. hence, this rbi only yields a rough estimate
of the resource’s multitasking preference.
multitasking (t1,t2,r)/defines/summationtext
e∈etr(t1,t2,r),eworkload >1eworkload duration //summationtext
e∈etr(t1,t2,r),eworkload >0eworkload duration
rbi 3.2. new attribute values : the number of times a resource completed a task
during a given time slot with an attribute value never seen before for any event
(e.g., for the attribute sum ). this rbi reﬂects the resource’s propensity to execute
new and hence risky tasks. for the attribute sum , the rbi can be formalized as
follows:
new attribute values (t1,t2,r,sum)/defines|{e∈ectr(t1,t2,r)|∄e/prime∈el
[e/prime
sum=esum∧e/prime
time <etime]}|.
rbi 3.3. activity reassignments : the number of times when an activity started by a
given resource during a given time slot was later completed by a different resource.5
activity reassignments (t1,t2,r)/defines|{e∈etr(t1,t2,r)|etype=start∧
∃e/prime∈el[e/prime
type=complete ∧
e/prime
resource /negationslash=r∧e/prime
task=etask∧
e/prime
caseid=ecaseid∧e/prime
time >etime]}|
4. productivity: how good is a resource at what it does? productivity rbis aim to
measure a resource’s results—for example, its results in terms of the timeliness, cost,
or quality of outputs (assuming that this information is recorded in the event log).
here we deﬁne rbis for the number of activities/cases completed with a given outcome
in which a resource was involved, the fraction of activities/cases completed with a
given outcome in which a resource was involved with respect to the total number of
activities/cases completed with a given outcome, the average value of a given outcome
5the deﬁnition is provided for cases without activity repetitions. if activities are repeated, one would need
to use activity instance identiﬁers.
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.mining resource proﬁles from event logs 1:11
for cases/activities completed in which a given resource was involved, and the number
of times when a given activity was repeated when completed by a resource.
rbi 4.1. activity outcomes : the fraction of activities completed with a given outcome
(e.g., duration ) during a given time slot by a given resource with respect to the total
number of activities completed by the resource during the time slot. for activity
duration, the rbi can be formalized as follows:
intime activities (t1,t2,r,dur)/defines
|{e∈ectr(t1,t2,r)|etask duration <dur}|/|{ectr(t1,t2,r)}|.
rbi 4.2. case outcomes : the fraction of cases completed during a given time slot
with a given outcome (e.g., customer feedback cf) in which a given resource was
involved with respect to the total number of cases completed during the time slot
in which the resource was involved. this rbi requires a case outcome attribute to
be recorded, such as feedback (a numeric value, e.g., a customer rating). for the
attribute feedback , the rbi can be formalized as follows:
satisfactory cases (t1,t2,r,cf)/defines
|{c∈cct(t1,t2)∩cr(r)|cf eedback ≥cf}|/|cct(t1,t2)∩cr(r)|.
rbi 4.3. average duration of a given activity : the average duration of instances of
a given activity completed during a given time slot by a given resource.
average activity duration (t1,t2,r,a)/defines/summationtext
e∈ectr(t1,t2,r),etask=aetask duration /
|{e∈ectr(t1,t2,r)|etask=a}|
rbi 4.4. average case duration : the average duration of cases completed during a
given time slot in which a given resource was involved.
average case duration (t1,t2,r)/defines/summationtext
c∈cct(t1,t2)∩cr(r)ccase duration /
|cct(t1,t2)∩cr(r)|
rbi 4.5. average customer feedback : the average customer feedback for cases com-
pleted during a given time slot in which a given resource was involved.
average customer feedback (t1,t2,r)/defines/summationtext
c∈cct(t1,t2)∩cr(r)cfeedback /
|cct(t1,t2)∩cr(r)|
5. collaboration: how well does a resource work with other resources? it is important
to measure the collaborative aspects of resource behavior. rbis in this category can
help us learn about a resource’s collaboration patterns with some other resources (e.g.,
the number of handovers from/to a given resource or the number of times when two
given resources were involved in the same cases) or obtain insight into a resource’s
overall social position within an organization (e.g., the number of other resources that
executed a given activity, the average number of resources involved in the same cases
with a given resource, or the fraction of resources involved in the same cases with a
given resource during a given time slot with respect to the total number of resources
active during the time slot).
rbi 5.1. interactions between two given resources : the number of cases completed
during a given time slot in which two given resources were involved.
interactions between resources (t1,t2,r,r2)/defines|cct(t1,t2)∩cr(r)∩cr(r2)|
rbi 5.2. social position : the fraction of resources involved in the same cases with a
given resource during a given time slot with respect to the total number of resources
active during the time slot.
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.1:12 a. pika et al.
fig. 5. example of time series for rbi 3.3 “activity reassignments”.
social position (t1,t2,r)/defines
|{r1∈r|∃c∈ctr(t1,t2,r1)∩ctr(t1,t2,r)}|/|{r1∈r|∃c∈ctr(t1,t2,r1)}|
rbi 5.3. delegations : the number of times a resource, r, assigns a task to another
resource, r2. for this rbi, a corresponding attribute (e.g., creator ) must be recorded
in the log. for the attribute creator , the rbi can be formalized as follows:
delegations (t1,t2,r,r2)/defines|{e∈ectr(t1,t2,r2)|ecreator =r∧r/negationslash=r2}|.
3.2.2. extracting rbi time series from an event log. in the second step, we extract the rbi
time series to track the evolution of a particular rbi over time. the rbi time series
consists of rbi values extracted for a given period of time (e.g., per day or week) for a
given resource. let rbi n(t1,t2,r,[p1...pn]) denote the value of an rbi nduring a given
time slot, t1tot2, for a given resource, r, and optional parameters p1...pn;ts startbe
the starting time point; ts slotsize be the sampling rate; ts sizebe the number of time
slots; and start (t)a n d end(t) be functions that return the beginning and the end of a
time slot for a given time t,respectively. an rbi time series is deﬁned as
ts rbi n/defines{(rbi n(start (t),end(t),r,[p1...pn]),t)|
t∈{ts start+i∗ts slotsize |i∈{0,1,..., ts size−1}}}.
here we use the following functions for the beginning and the end of a time slot:
start (t)=tand end(t)=t+ts slotsize ; other functions can be deﬁned.6(this gives
ﬂexibility to use different time series sampling methods. for example, one may deﬁne
overlapping time slots.) the starting time point for the analysis, the time series sam-
pling rate, and the number of time slots are the input parameters provided by a user.
the time series sampling rate is an important parameter that can affect the analysis
results. selection of the time series sampling rate is a known problem often discussed in
the literature [lijfﬁjt et al. 2012]. the time series sampling rate may depend on process
characteristics (e.g., process granularity) and the type of analysis in which the user is
interested. for example, if managers are interested in checking whether or not a team
is less productive on mondays, they will look at the daily rbi values. figure 5 depicts
an example of a time series (monthly values) for rbi 3.3, “activity reassignments.” we
can observe that some tasks were reassigned from resource anne until april 2008, and
that there were no subsequent reassignments.
3.2.3. analyzing the rbi time series. in the third step, we analyze the extracted rbi
time series and visualize the analysis results. time series charts accompanied by
6start (t)=t+aand end(t)=t+tsslotsize +b,w h e r e aand bare input parameters.
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.mining resource proﬁles from event logs 1:13
trend lines can give many insights into the dynamics of resource behavior; however,
they are not very convenient when the amount of available data is large. to deal with
this issue, we use automatic techniques for time series analysis, such as the detection
of outliers [van der loo 2010] and change points [ross and adams 2012], and the time
series comparison [mann and whitney 1947].
many methods for change point detection have been developed; here we use non-
parametric methods [hawkins and deng 2010; ross and adams 2012] that do not
make assumptions about the distribution of the data. users can choose nonparametric
tests for detecting changes in location (mann-whitney), changes in scale (mood), or
arbitrary distributional changes (kolmogorov-smirnov, cramer–von mises) [ross and
adams 2012].
identifying outliers in the rbi time series (i.e., the points in time when rbi values
are signiﬁcantly different from typical values) can be helpful in the investigation of
problems. we use an outlier detection method that ﬁrst ﬁts the distribution of the
observations and then detects the observations that are unlikely to be generated by
this distribution [van der loo 2010].
evaluation of the performance of a resource using rbis can also be done by comparing
the resource’s behavior to the behavior of other resources. this allows users to quickly
identify those resources whose behavior is different from others (e.g., underperforming
or overperforming resources). to compare rbi time series, we use the nonparametric
man-whitney u-test [mann and whitney 1947].
3.3. quantifying the outcome of resource behavior
whereas the analyzing resource behavior module described earlier allows us to extract
descriptive information about different aspects of resource behavior, the goal of the
quantifying the outcome of resource behavior module is to provide a method that
allows managers to check whether or not a given resource’s behaviors affect given
outcomes (research question 2 in section 1). for example, managers may be interested
to learn how a resource’s workload affects the quality of their work or if the case
duration is inﬂuenced by the number of resources processing a case.
we use regression analysis to quantify the relationships between resource behaviors
and outcomes. this is a statistical technique used for modeling the relationship between
variables [montgomery et al. 2012]. we use regression analysis because it is a popular
technique often used for the investigation of relationships between different social and
economic phenomena, and its results are easy to interpret for business users. the
framework supports linear regression analysis [montgomery et al. 2012], as well as
nonparametric kernel-based regression, which does not make assumptions about data
distribution [racine and li 2004].
to perform regression analysis, it is necessary to deﬁne the dependent variable and
one or more independent variables. our framework provides an interface for users to
deﬁne the dependent and independent variables that they would like to analyze. it
then extracts the values of the deﬁned variables from an event log, ﬁts a regression
model, and provides the p-value, r2[gujarati 2004] (coefﬁcient of determination), and
a plot of data and the ﬁtted regression model (in the case of one independent variable).
in the context of business processes, we can look at resource behaviors and outcomes
that relate to cases (e.g., the relationship between the percentage of tasks executed in a
case by a given resource and the case duration or cost) and tasks (e.g., the relationship
between a task outcome and the experience of a resource executing the task), or we
can look at resource behaviors and outcomes during a given period of time (e.g., the
relationship between the number of distinct tasks completed per week and the number
of task instances completed during the week). next we describe how to analyze whether
or not relationships exist between given resource behaviors and outcomes for the three
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.1:14 a. pika et al.
perspectives referred to here as the case,task,a n d time perspectives. the procedure
consists of the following steps: (1) deﬁne a set of instances to be included in the analysis
(i.e., cases, task instances, or time slots), (2) deﬁne the value of the dependent variable
for a given instance, and (3) deﬁne the value of an independent variable for a given
instance.
case perspective.
(1) deﬁne a set of cases to be included in the analysis, cra. the cases in which a user
may be interested include all completed cases, cases in which a given resource was
involved, or cases of a certain type. for example, cramay comprise all cases in
which a given resource, r, was involved: cra/definescr(r).
(2) deﬁne the value of the dependent variable dv for a given case c∈cra(e.g., one
may want to check whether some resource behavior affects the duration or cost of
cases). for example, dv(c) may yield the duration of case c:
dv(c)/definesccase duration .
(3) deﬁne the value of an independent variable ivifor a given case c∈cra(e.g., one
may want to check whether the percentage of tasks completed by a given resource
in the case or the number of resources involved in the case affects the case outcome).
for example, ivi(c) may yield the number of resources involved in case c:
ivi(c)/defines|{r∈r|∃e∈el[eresource =r∧ecaseid=c]}|.
task perspective.
(1) deﬁne a set of events that should be analyzed, era. a user may wish to include
in the analysis the events related to completed tasks, instances of a given task,
or tasks completed by a given resource. for example, eramay comprise all events
related to completed instances of a given activity a:
era/defines{e∈e|etask=a∧etype=complete }.
(2) deﬁne the value of the dependent variable dv for a given event e∈era.f o r
example, dv(e) may yield the task duration: dv(e)/definesetask duration .
(3) deﬁne the value of an independent variable ivifor a given event e∈era(e.g., the
experience or workload of a resource that executed the related task). for example,
ivi(e) may yield the resource’s workload: ivi(e)/defineseworkload .
time perspective.
(1) deﬁne time series parameters, namely the starting time point for the analysis,
sampling rate (e.g., a day or a week), and the number of time slots in which one
is interested. for a given time slot, there can be only one value of the dependent
variable and one value of each independent variable.
(2) deﬁne the value of the dependent variable dvduring a given time slot ( t1,t2)( e . g . ,
the number of task instances completed by a resource or the fraction of cases with
a given outcome completed in which a resource was involved with respect to the
total number of cases completed in which the resource was involved). for example,
a user may look at the average duration of a task completed by a given resource, r:
dv(t1,t2,r)/defines/summationtext
e∈ectr(t1,t2,r)etask duration /|ectr(t1,t2,r)|.
(3) deﬁne the value of an independent variable ividuring a time slot ( t1,t2)( e . g . ,t h e
average resource workload). for example, a user may look at the number of distinct
tasks completed by a resource r:
ivi(t1,t2,r)/defines|{a∈a|∃e∈ectr(t1,t2,r)[etask=a]}|.
the framework then extracts from an event log the values of the deﬁned depen-
dent variable dv and all independent variables ivifor all cases in cr(for the case
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.mining resource proﬁles from event logs 1:15
perspective), events in er(for the task perspective), or time slots (for the time perspec-
tive), such as weekly values of the average duration of tasks completed by a resource and
weekly values of the average workload of the resource. it runs regression analysis using
the variable values and provides r2,t h e p-value, the ﬁtted regression model details (in
the case of multiple independent variables), and a plot (when one independent vari-
able is considered; an example is provided later in figure 15) that allow us to identify
whether or not a relationship exists between given resource behaviors and outcomes.
3.4. evaluating resource productivity
the goal of the evaluating resource productivity module is to provide a method for
evaluating and comparing the productivity of human resources and tracking the evo-
lution of productivity over time (research question 3 in section 1). if resources only
execute one task, use the same inputs needed to perform this task (e.g., information
or materials), and their working hours are the same, then it is possible to compare
the productivity of these resources by simply counting the number of task instances
completed by each resource during a given time period. however, this scenario is not re-
alistic because resources in modern organizations are often involved in multiple tasks
with different levels of complexity.
to be able to evaluate resource productivity in such complex environments, we use
the dea [bogetoft and otto 2011] technique. dea takes as input combinations of
inputs and outputs that were previously observed and estimates the best practice (the
“efﬁcient frontier”) [bogetoft and otto 2011]. this is a nonparametric method based on
linear programming that can consider multiple inputs and outputs and is often used in
operations research to compare the efﬁciency of companies [bogetoft and otto 2011],
departments or company functions [thanassoulis 1995; tavakoli and shirouyehzad
2013], and business processes [dohmen and leyer 2010], with typical inputs being
money, materials, and people and typical outputs being units of production. dea does
not require knowledge of the relation between inputs and outputs and is not limited to
a certain underlying stochastic function of the data [dohmen and leyer 2010; cooper
et al. 2011]. thus, there are not many disadvantages compared to other efﬁciency
evaluation methods like free disposal hull [cooper et al. 2011]. it has been shown
that it can be applied on a process level using process instances as decision-making
units without severe limitations [burger and moormann 2008] and has been applied
to assess resource behavior in general without using data from event logs [koch-rogge
et al. 2014].
in many organizations, the amount of output (e.g., the number of completions of a
given task) that should be produced by a resource in a given role using a given input
(e.g., working hours) is unknown. the ﬁrst challenge is to be able to identify productivity
“best practice” for the role from data. the dea technique extracts from data the “set
of combinations of input and output such that the input can actually produce the
output” (referred to as the technology ) and estimates the best practice for the technology
(referred to as the efﬁcient frontier ) [bogetoft and otto 2011]. when estimating the
efﬁcient frontier, users may select one of the four dea models based on their return-to-
scale assumptions: constant returns to scale (crs), decreasing returns to scale (drs),
increasing returns to scale (irs), or variable returns to scale (vrs) [bogetoft and
otto 2011]. by default, we use the crs model. in the context of business processes, a
resource’s working hours would typically be considered as an input. it seems reasonable
to expect that the amount of a resource’s output should be proportional to the amount of
the resource’s working time. for example, the number of tasks completed by a resource
who works 40 hours per week should be twice as high as the number of tasks completed
by a resource who only works 20 hours per week.
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.1:16 a. pika et al.
dea also allows us to assign costs to inputs and outputs (if they are available) and
to calculate optimal revenue output, optimal cost input, or optimal proﬁt [bogetoft and
otto 2011]. for example, a user may wish to assign costs to tasks with different levels
of complexity and consider them when estimating productivity best practice.
after learning the efﬁcient frontier—that is, the productivity best practice—we would
like to measure the productivity of resources with respect to this frontier. dea also
allows us to measure efﬁciency as related to the efﬁcient frontier [bogetoft and otto
2011]. the productivity score for a given resource during a given time period is a value
from 0 to 1, with 1 being the maximum possible productivity. if a resource’s productivity
score during a given time period is 1, this means that the combination of the resource’s
inputs and outputs during this time period belongs to the efﬁcient frontier.
our framework allows users to deﬁne inputs and outputs (and their costs if they
are known) for a given resource during a given time slot, estimate the efﬁcient fron-
tier using the deﬁned inputs and outputs from an event log, and evaluate resource
productivity as related to this frontier.
as the ﬁrst step, users should deﬁne the values of the resource inputs and outputs
for a given time slot. on many occasions, resources use the same inputs (e.g., tools
or information) that they require to conduct their work. for such cases, there is no
need to deﬁne the inputs, as they are constant. however, in some cases, the inputs are
necessary. resource inputs and outputs that can be handled by our framework depend
on information recorded in an event log. here we focus on resource inputs and outputs
that can be extracted from a basic event log. we also provide examples of resource
inputs and outputs that can be extracted from richer event logs; however, this is a
direction for future work, as we explain in section 5.2. let ri(t1,t2,r,[p1...pn]) denote
resource input and ro(t1,t2,r,[p1...pn]) denote resource output during a given time
slot, t1tot2, for resource rand for an optional set of other parameters p1...pn,f o r
example, for a given activity:
—resource inputs that can be extracted from a basic event log include (1) the amount of
time a resource works on a process during a given time slot (it should be considered
as an input if it varies for different resources or if a casual worker’s hours vary
from week to week) and (2) the number of cases active during a given time slot (it
should be considered as input if the number of active cases varies during different
periods so that productivity scores are not affected during periods with fewer cases).
for example, if we consider as input active cases, resource input can be deﬁned as
ri(t1,t2,r)/defines|{c∈c|∃e∈el[ecaseid=ccaseid∧etime≥t1∧etime <t2]}|. resource skills
and experience are examples of resource inputs that require a richer log.
—resource outputs that can be extracted from a basic event log include (1) the number
of instances of a given task completed by a resource during a given time slot, (2) the
number of cases completed during a given time slot in which a resource was involved,
and (3) the number of task instances completed by a resource during a given time
slot. for example, if we consider as output task completions, resource output can be
deﬁned as ro(t1,t2,r)/defines|ectr(t1,t2,r)|. an example of resource output that requires
a richer event log is the number of cases of a given type (e.g., for a given product or
of a certain complexity) completed during a given time slot in which a resource was
involved.
as the second step, the user selects which data should be used to estimate the efﬁcient
frontier. our framework provides three options:
(1)consider inputs and outputs for one resource during different time periods . this
way, the framework will estimate a “personal” efﬁcient frontier. an assumption
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.mining resource proﬁles from event logs 1:17
fig. 6. examples of outputs for resource productivity evaluation.
here is that the frontier does not change over time, although the productivity of a
resource can change.
(2)use inputs and outputs for multiple resources during one time period . an assump-
tion here is that the efﬁcient frontier is the same for the resources but their indi-
vidual productivity can be different; hence, the user should only consider resources
that do the same type of work.
(3)use inputs and outputs for multiple resources during different time periods .a n
assumption here is that the efﬁcient frontier is the same for the resources and does
not change over time, but the resources can have different levels of productivity
that can change over time.
our framework uses deﬁned inputs and outputs and extracts from an event log a
set of observed input-output combinations for selected resources during selected time
periods. it also allows users to deﬁne costs of inputs and outputs if they are available.
it then estimates the efﬁcient frontier using the set of input-output values, calculates
resource productivity as related to the frontier, and produces a chart illustrating the
productivity. figure 6(a) shows an example of output for productivity evaluation for
one resource during different time periods, figure 6(b) shows an example of output for
productivity evaluation for multiple resources during one time period, and an example
of output for productivity evaluation for two resources during different time periods is
provided later in figure 16.
4. validation
this section presents two types of validation for our framework. we ﬁrst apply our
framework to analyze the behaviors of employees in an australian company. the case
study demonstrates real-life examples of the analyses that can be performed by the
three modules of our framework (sections 4.1.1 through 4.1.3) and is followed by a
discussion of the insights gained from the case study (section 4.1.4). we then present
the results of an online survey conducted with managers to evaluate their opinions
about the usefulness of the framework. the framework has been implemented as a
plug-in7of the prom8process mining framework as described previously [pika 2015].
4.1. analyzing employee behaviors in an australian company
we applied our framework to analyze employee behaviors in an australian company.
the company was interested in analyzing the behaviors of 34 selected employees to
7http://yawlfoundation.org/risk/ﬁles/miningresourceproﬁles.7z.
8http://www.promtools.org.
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.1:18 a. pika et al.
fig. 7. rbi 1.2, “case types,” for employee r10: fractions of cases related to ﬁve products.
(1) evaluate the performance of the employees (the company representative already
had an idea about the performance levels of different employees and was interested
to see if the analysis results would conﬁrm the assumptions),
(2) identify opportunities for improvement of their performance, and
(3) identify opportunities for improving process performance.
the data was collected from different information systems, anonymized, and cleaned
up based on input from process experts. it was an iterative process that involved
several meetings with company representatives during which we discussed the data
requirements and agreed on the data attributes used in the analysis. the resulting
event log contained 17,750 cases and more than 700,000 events. events in the log
contained ﬁve basic attributes (i.e., caseid ,task ,type ,time ,and resource ) and also at-
tributes case type,feedback (customer feedback), and experience (the number of days
an employee had been employed by the company at the time of event occurrence). the
original data contained information about roles and employees involved in events. we
created two versions of the event log. in the ﬁrst version of the log, we only selected
role information and associated it with attribute resource . this version was used to
demonstrate role-based analysis (rbi 2.1 in section 4.1.1). in the second version of
the event log, we only selected employee information and associated it with attribute
resource . this version was used to analyze employee behaviors (all other analyses in
the case study). we analyzed weekly behaviors of the 34 employees over a period of
2 years. the employees were only involved in one process represented in the event log
used in the analysis. the company’s feedback on the usefulness of the analysis results
was collected via an unstructured interview. in the following sections, we ﬁrst provide
examples from the case study illustrating the three modules of our framework and then
discuss the insights gained from the case study and show how they can help improve
process and employee performance.
4.1.1. module 1: analyzing resource behavior. we demonstrate examples of rbis from
each category of resource behavior. an example of an indicator that reﬂects resource
skills is depicted in figure 7 (rbi 1.2, “case types”). it shows the fractions of completed
cases related to ﬁve products (referred to here as a, b, c, d, and e), in which employee
r10 was involved with respect to the total number of completed cases in which r10 was
involved. the chart reveals that employee r10 was typically involved in cases related
to products a and b, but we can see that the employee was not very experienced in
cases related to product e.
figure 8 depicts the values of rbi 2.2, “number of cases completed in which a
resource was involved” (a utilization indicator), for employees r4 and r5 who play the
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.mining resource proﬁles from event logs 1:19
fig. 8. rbi 2.2: number of cases completed per week in which resources r5 (a) and r4 (b) were involved.
fig. 9. rbi 2.1: number of task instances completed per week by employees in role 1, role 2, and role 3.
same role. we can observe an upward trend for employee r5: the number of cases in
which r5 was typically involved gradually increased from 25 cases per week in january
2013 to 50 cases in july 2014, whereas the number of cases in which r4 was involved
was stable starting from july 2013 at around 17 cases per week. having analyzed this
utilization indicator for the 34 employees, we could observe three types of behavior:
some employees were becoming more active over time, other employees displayed stable
behavior, and some employees showed irregular patterns being more or less active
during different periods. figure 9 depicts another example of a utilization indicator
(rbi 2.1) for three roles, referred to here as role 1, role 2, and role 3. although the
numbers of task instances completed during the week by role 2 and role 3 did not
change signiﬁcantly, employees in role 1 tended to complete more task instances over
time.
an example of an indicator that illustrates a resource’s preferences is depicted in
figure 10. it shows the number of task reassignments from employees r3 and r15
(rbi 3.3, “activity reassignments”). as we can see, starting from may 2013, the number
of times a task assigned to employee r3 was completed by another employee increased,
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.1:20 a. pika et al.
fig. 10. rbi 3.3: number of task reassignments from employees r15 and r3.
fig. 11. rbi 4.3: average duration of a given task completed by an employee.
fig. 12. rbi 4.5: average customer feedback for cases managed by r11.
and during some weeks it was around 70. the number of task reassignments from
employee r15 also increased from may 2013, but it typically did not exceed 10. we
could observe signiﬁcant differences in the number of task reassignments for different
employees having the same role. although for some of them the high number of task
reassignments can be explained by a high workload, the reasons for frequent task
reassignments from other employees should be investigated.
the values of rbi 4.3, “average duration of a given activity” (a productivity indicator),
for employees r16, r17, and r18 are depicted in figure 11. we can clearly see that
employee r17 was much faster in the execution of this activity (the average duration
was typically below 100 hours) than the two other employees for whom the average
duration of the task sometimes reached more than 500 hours. we could observe similar
differences for other tasks and employees. the company will explore ways of improving
process performance by creating groups of efﬁcient employees for each task. another
example of a productivity indicator is depicted in figure 12, showing rbi 4.5, “average
customer feedback,” for cases managed by employee r11. the values of this indicator
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.mining resource proﬁles from event logs 1:21
fig. 13. rbi 5.2: fraction of employees during a week involved in the same cases with an employee.
are based on a sample of cases rated by customers. the indicator values ranged between
three and four during most weeks, which means that the quality of service was rated by
customers “as expected” (value three) or “higher than expected” (value four) for cases
managed by r11 (value zero means that no cases were completed during the week
that were rated by customers and managed by r11). during some weeks, the average
customer feedback was “much higher than expected” (value ﬁve).
figure 13 depicts the values of rbi 5.2, “social position,” for employees r7 and r11.
it is an example of a collaboration indicator and it is the fraction of resources active
during a week who were involved in the same cases with a given resource with respect
to the total number of resources active during the week. we can see in this ﬁgure
that the values of the indicator were stable for employee r7 but gradually increased
for employee r11 until june 2014, which means that employee r11 was becoming
involved with more employees in the same cases over time.
to obtain a more complete picture of a resource’s behavior, it is necessary to look at
the resource’s proﬁle. as an example, figure 14 depicts a proﬁle of employee r30 that
comprises ﬁve rbis from different categories of resource behavior. we can observe that
there was a change in the employee’s behavior around march 2014. after this point in
time, the employee performed fewer distinct tasks (figure 14(a)) and was involved in
more cases (figure 14(b)) of shorter duration on average (figure 14(d)). the fraction of
employees involved in the same cases with r30 increased (figure 14(e)). we can also ob-
serve that the number of task reassignments from employee r30 was typically not very
high and that tasks were not reassigned from r30 before february 2013 (figure 14(c)).
the changes in resource behavior that we can observe in figure 14(a), (b), (d), and (e)
are related to changes in the employee’s set of responsibilities in the organization.
4.1.2. module 2: quantifying the outcome of resource behavior. an example of a process
outcome that is available in a typical event log is duration. we consider duration from
three perspectives, namely case, task, and time, and show examples from the case
study for each perspective. based on our knowledge of the process and the data, we
did not identify any confounding factors that had to be eliminated in the procedure of
performing the regression analysis.
we ﬁrst looked at the case perspective and checked the relationship between the
number of employees involved in a case (independent variable) and the case duration
(dependent variable). all cases were included in the analysis. in our previous research,
we found that in some processes, having higher numbers of resources involved in a case
is often associated with long-running cases [pika et al. 2013a]. we discovered for this
process that there is only a weak relationship between the two variables ( r2is 0.24,
p<.001; the data and the ﬁtted regression line are depicted in figure 15(a).
we then looked at the task perspective and checked the relationship between the du-
ration of a task (dependent variable) and the experience of the employee who completed
the task (independent variable). instances of all tasks were included in the analysis.
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.1:22 a. pika et al.
fig. 14. proﬁle of employee r30. (a) rbi 1.1: number of distinct tasks completed. (b) rbi 2.2: number of
cases in which employee r30 was involved. (c) rbi 3.3: number of task reassignments from r30. (d) rbi 4.4:
average duration of cases in which r30 was involved. (e) rbi 5.2: fraction of employees involved in the same
cases with r30.
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.mining resource proﬁles from event logs 1:23
fig. 15. (a) relationship between the number of employees involved in a case( x-axis) and the case duration
(y-axis). (b) relationship between experience of an employee executing a task ( x-axis) and the task duration
(y-axis). (c) relationship between the number of tasks completed by employee r5 per week ( x-axis) and
average duration of the tasks ( y-axis).
experience was estimated as the number of days the employee had been employed by
the company at the time of task completion. we found that employee experience had
no inﬂuence on the tasks’ duration ( r2is 0.002, p<.001) (figure 15(b)).
we also looked at the time perspective and checked how the number of tasks com-
pleted by an employee during a week (independent variable) affected the average
duration of the tasks (dependent variable) for employees r5 and r7. in both cases,
workload affects task duration; however, the effect was strong for employee r5 ( r2
is 0.79, p<.001) (figure 15(c)) and weak for employee r7 ( r2is 0.23, p<.001).
based on these observations, the company will explore ways to balance the workload
of employees whose efﬁciency suffers when they are overloaded.
4.1.3. module 3: evaluating resource productivity. we calculated weekly productivity
scores for the 34 selected employees for a period of 109 weeks. we considered as an out-
put the number of executions of a given activity. the company representative assigned
the level of complexity to each activity (either high, medium, or low), which we used
to assign output costs (either ﬁve, three, or one, respectively). we did not use inputs,
as the employees had access to the same resources needed to perform their work (e.g.,
information). the 34 selected employees belonged to ﬁve different roles, and we learned
from data the optimal revenue output (i.e., the estimated efﬁcient frontier considering
the costs of outputs (section 3.4)) separately for each role. then the weekly productiv-
ity scores for each employee were calculated as the division of the observed revenue
output of an employee by the optimal revenue output calculated for the employee’s role.
the resulting productivity scores range from zero to one, with one being the maximum
possible productivity.9
as an example, figure 16 depicts the productivity scores for two employees in the
same role. we can observe that the productivity of employee r5 was between 0.4 and
0.6 most of the time, and it gradually decreased from march 2014. the productivity
of employee r9 was typically lower than the productivity of r5, and it varied dur-
ing different periods. having extracted the productivity scores for the 34 employees,
we could observe that some employees in the same role had stable and similar pro-
ductivity scores, whereas others displayed irregular productivity patterns. in some
instances, the productivity scores extracted from the data supported the beliefs of the
company representative about the employees’ productivity, whereas the productivity
9this case study does not fully demonstrate the beneﬁt of using dea for productivity evaluation, as we did
not use inputs and the levels of activity complexity were assigned by the company representative.
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.1:24 a. pika et al.
fig. 16. weekly productivity scores for employees r5 and r9.
scores of other employees were not as expected (i.e., the scores were higher or lower than
expected).
4.1.4. summary of the case study. this section summarizes our ﬁndings from the case
study and discusses the lessons learned. the ﬁrst goal was to perform an evidence-
based evaluation of the performance of the selected 34 employees. the company was
interested to see if our ﬁndings conﬁrmed its assumptions. we extracted indicators in
the ﬁve categories of resource behavior and evaluated the overall productivity of the
employees. in most cases, the analysis results conﬁrmed the assumptions identifying
better and poorer performers. however, we found that some employees suspected of
inconsistent performance actually displayed stable behavioral patterns (e.g., in terms
of the number of cases and tasks completed and the average duration of the tasks).
from the analysis of the behaviors of employees in this process, we could see that abrupt
signiﬁcant changes in employee behaviors were typically related to changes in role or
changes in portfolio and outliers were often related to periods of vacations, whereas
gradual changes in behaviors often required attention, as they indicated changes in
employee performance. we also discovered that some employees were very active (e.g.,
involved in many cases and tasks); however, they became slower in the execution of
some tasks over time, tasks were frequently reassigned from them, or they involved
many employees in the cases they managed. this shows us that due care should be
taken with the interpretation of results. each indicator is an abstraction that highlights
a certain aspect of resource behavior while discarding others. to obtain a more complete
picture of employee performance, it would be necessary to look at different dimensions.
the second goal was to identify opportunities for improvement in the performance of
the employees. we learned from the analysis that there were signiﬁcant differences in
the amount of time taken to complete a particular task for different employees; hence,
the company will be exploring the possibility of assigning tasks to those employees who
are more efﬁcient in the execution of a particular task. we also discovered that for some
employees, the speed of task processing was signiﬁcantly affected by their workload.
the company plans to explore ways to balance the workload of such employees.
finally, the third goal was to identify opportunities for improving process perfor-
mance. on the basis of the results, it is expected that case throughput times may be
reduced by deﬁning pools of efﬁcient employees for each task and assigning tasks to
efﬁcient resources. balancing employee workload should also contribute to shorter case
processing times. we also identiﬁed differences in the number of employees processing
cases handled by different case managers. the company will be looking into these cases
in more detail to identify the reasons and suggest best practices for case resourcing.
applying the framework to analyze the behaviors of employees in an australian
company, we demonstrated the different types of analysis that the framework allows us
to perform. we showed how the framework can help to evaluate resource performance
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.mining resource proﬁles from event logs 1:25
table i. as-is versus would be helpful with regard to resource performance evaluation
as-is (m, sd) would be helpful (m, sd)
resource skills 2.88, 0.633 5.78, 0.909
resource utilization 3.12, 0.739 5.80, 1.056
resource preferences 2.59, 0.670 5.57, 1.151
resource productivity 2.91, 0.726 6.02, 0.869
resource collaboration 2.36, 0.533 5.45, 1.214
m, mean; sd, standard deviation; “as-is” scale: 1–4 (“please indicate if [ resource
behavior category name ] is currently analyzed in your organization when evaluating
resource performance”: (1) no opinion, (2) not analyzed, (3) analyzed based on personal
judgments, (4) analyzed using information provided by information systems); “would
be helpful”: 7-point likert scale.
in a more objective way and to identify opportunities for improving the performance of
employees and the business process.
4.2. survey on the usefulness of the framework
we conducted an online anonymous survey to evaluate the perceived usefulness of our
proposed framework among managers (as they are the intended users of the frame-
work). the survey described the functionality of each module and showed screenshots
of examples of its application using a real dataset10(the survey questions are avail-
able at yawlfoundation.org11). questions were then asked regarding usefulness of the
framework features, current status of analyzing resource behavior in respondents’ or-
ganizations, and process orientation (managers with higher process orientation are
expected to see a higher usability of resource performance analyses [forsberg et al.
1999]).
the questionnaires were distributed using professional social media (e.g.,
linkedin12). they were also sent via email to employees in the ﬁnancial services indus-
try in germany using a non–public university database of industry contacts available
to a member of the research team (the database includes contacts of 2,286 employees,
of whom 34.4% (786) are expected to have managerial positions [leyer and moormann
2014]). we asked employees with managerial functions to ﬁll out the questionnaire
anonymously. the questionnaire was available in english and in german. in total, 42
managers answered the questionnaire fully (11 in english, 31 in german). the partici-
pants had a professional experience of 10.9 years on average (sd: 7.56) and supervised
31.9 (sd: 55.27) employees on average. there was no statistically signiﬁcant difference
between the german and english survey responses; thus, the answers were analyzed
jointly. among the respondents, 59.52% indicated that they worked in the ﬁnance and
banking industry; others speciﬁed the following industries: information technology,
consulting services, manufacturing, education, health, and the restaurant business.
the participants reported a limited application of resource behavior analysis in the
ﬁve categories (the “as-is” column in table i) but would ﬁnd such analyses to be very
helpful (the “would be helpful” column in table i). overall, the modules (including
features within the modules) were considered as very relevant by the participants (ta-
ble ii). the most relevant features (with the percentage of respondents who selected the
feature shown in brackets) are analyzing indicators of resource behavior in the cate-
gories of productivity (71.4%), skills (66.7%), and utilization (61.9%); estimating trends
(52.4%); comparing the overall resource productivity scores for multiple resources
10the survey did not use the dataset from the case study company.
11http://yawlfoundation.org/risk/ﬁles/survey.pdf.
12http://www.linkedin.com.
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.1:26 a. pika et al.
table ii. perceived usefulness of the framework and its modules
module (mean, standard deviation)*
framework (5.71, 1.031)
analyzing resource behavior (5.91, 0.878)
quantifying the outcome of resource behavior (5.83, 0.824)
evaluating resource productivity (5.86, 1.026)
*7-point likert scale.
during different time periods (52.4%), and ﬁnding correlations between resource be-
haviors and outcomes for the time perspective (50.0%).
there is a weak statistically signiﬁcant inﬂuence of process orientation on the eval-
uation of the modules (ns, nonsigniﬁcant): analyzing resource behavior (ns (0.427),
r2=− 0.020), quantifying the outcome of resource behavior (p<.05 (2.039), r2=
0.072), evaluating resource productivity (p<.05 (2.227), r2=0.088), overall evalua-
tion of the framework (ns (1.942), r2=0.065). as a consequence, it can be stated that
the degree to which the framework was considered relevant by a manager is almost
independent of the degree of process orientation of their environment. in addition, the
number of subordinates and length of working experience did not have any statistically
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the degree to which the framework was considered relevant.
the survey revealed that only a limited amount of resource analysis is conducted in
companies. it conﬁrmed that managers ﬁnd our framework useful for resource perfor-
mance evaluation and that their opinion of potential usefulness of the framework is
independent of the level of process orientation of their environments, their length of
experience, or the number of subordinates.
5. discussion
in this section, we ﬁrst discuss the contributions of our work and compare it to existing
approaches. we then summarize assumptions and limitations of our framework and
discuss the ways in which our work can be extended.
5.1. contributions
human performance measurement and planning are challenging tasks [espinilla et al.
2013; peretz and fried 2012], as human behavior is complex [leftwich 2015] and
changes over time [beheshti et al. 2016]. despite the important role human resources
play in business processes [rosemann and vom brocke 2015] and the increase in
knowledge-intensive tasks in modern organizations [di ciccio et al. 2015; freel 2016;
wirtz and lovelock 2016], the bpm community has paid little attention to collaborative
aspects of bpm [di ciccio et al. 2015]. on the other hand, traditional resource perfor-
mance evaluation approaches proposed in the management literature are criticized for
lack of objectivity [espinilla et al. 2013] and narrow focus [neely et al. 2000]. in this
article, we presented a framework for mining resource proﬁles from process execution
data. knowledge about resource behaviors that can be extracted by our framework
enables evidence-based performance evaluation and may provide insights for better
workload planning, effective human resource development strategies, and resource
and process performance improvement, as we demonstrated in section 4.
the framework presented in this article is an extension of our earlier work [pika
et al. 2014], in which we proposed a method for analyzing resource behavior. here we
presented an extended framework that also includes a new method for quantifying
the outcome of resource behavior (section 3.3) and a new method for evaluating and
comparing resource productivity (section 3.4). we presented the results of a new case
study and a survey evaluating the usefulness of our framework (section 4).
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.mining resource proﬁles from event logs 1:27
some technical aspects of our framework were inspired by existing process mining
approaches [pika et al. 2013a, 2013b; de leoni et al. 2014; van der aalst 2013; bose
et al. 2013]: we use indicators extracted from event log data, our framework allows the
correlation of resource behaviors and outcomes, it allows analyzing resource behavior
from different perspectives, and it considers changes in resource behavior over time;
however, unlike the preceding approaches, the focus of our framework is resource
behavior analysis rather than business processes.
we adopted dea [bogetoft and otto 2011] for resource productivity evaluation. dea
was previously used to evaluate productivity of employees [manoharan et al. 2009;
wagner et al. 2003; koch-rogge et al. 2014]. however, in these case studies, data was
collected from different sources and manually transformed into a form suitable for
dea analysis. our goal, on the other hand, was not to demonstrate the use of dea in
a particular company but to present a method that allows us to deﬁne resource inputs
and outputs, extract their values from an event log, and evaluate resource productivity.
existing organizational mining approaches extract organizational structures [song
and van der aalst 2008; van der aalst et al. 2005], devise resource allocation mecha-
nisms [liu et al. 2012; cabanillas et al. 2013; kumar et al. 2013; ly et al. 2006], or focus
on few speciﬁc resource behaviors [huang et al. 2012; nakatumba and van der aalst
2010]. in contrast to these approaches, in this article we presented a framework that
focuses on employees, allows analyzing their behaviors from different perspectives, is
extensible (allows deﬁnition of new measures), and considers the evolution of resource
behaviors over time.
5.2. assumptions, limitations, and future work
we assume that the data recorded in an event log accurately represents a company’s
business process. if the event log contains incomplete or inaccurate information (e.g.,
some events or attributes are not recorded or the timestamps of events do not represent
the time of event occurrence), then the analysis results may be incorrect. we assume
that resources are involved in one process only; otherwise, logs from different processes
should be merged, ensuring that the case identiﬁers in the combined log are unique.
alternatively, the proportion of time a resource spent on the process under analysis
should be known to ensure fair comparisons across resources.
we provided examples of measures of resource behavior in each of the three modules
that can be mined from typical event logs. the option of deﬁning more comprehensive
sets of resource behavior measures relevant in different contexts can be explored.
we evaluated the usefulness of our framework by showing examples of its application
and conducting an online survey among managers. we also conducted a real case study
using a dataset containing the events from a core business process in an australian
company recorded over a 2-year period. we collected feedback from the case study com-
pany via an unstructured interview. a manager from the case study company was not
asked to participate in the online survey. to evaluate ease of use of the corresponding
software artifact, a study can be conducted in which users gain hands-on experience
with the tool and provide their feedback.
the framework is based on the analysis of event log data; hence, it can only pro-
vide knowledge about the process-related behaviors of resources. such knowledge can
potentially be used in an inappropriate way. for example, a narrow set of resource
behaviors may be used to instigate disciplinary action. the possibility of eliminating
potential framework misuse should be further investigated. countries may have dif-
ferent regulations regarding privacy and personal data protection. for example, an
employer may need to inform employees about data collection and analysis [van der
aalst et al. 2005], or permission of the relevant employee union may be required (as is
the case in germany). a direction for future work is providing users with an option to
select types of resource analysis depending on the regulations that exist.
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.1:28 a. pika et al.
6. conclusions
managers need objective information about the different working behaviors of re-
sources to better understand areas of performance improvement and to make more
informed resource-related decisions. such knowledge may enable better workload
planning, improved performance appraisal systems, and more efﬁcient resource de-
velopment strategies and provide insights for resource and process performance
improvement.
the framework we presented in this article contributes to the process mining ﬁeld,
speciﬁcally to the organizational mining area. in contrast to prior approaches, our
framework allows users to extract knowledge about different aspects of the behavior
of individual employees and teams, either using predeﬁned indicators or deﬁning their
own measures, to investigate the impact of given resource behaviors on process out-
comes, evaluate resource productivity, and understand changes in resource behavior
over time.
we performed two types of evaluation. we conducted a case study applying our
framework to an event log from an australian company to analyze employee behaviors
in the company. we demonstrated how the framework can be used to gain insights
into performance improvement. we also conducted an online survey of managers to
evaluate the perceived usefulness of the framework and its modules. we found that
most respondents did not evaluate many aspects of resource behavior, or they did it
solely based on their subjective judgments. they stated that the methods provided by
our framework would be useful and relevant to them.
acknowledgments
we would like to thank the process experts from the case study company for their help and insights shared
with us during the case study.
references
s. m. r. beheshti, b. benatallah, s. sakr, d. grigori, h. m. motahari-nezhad, m. c. barukh, a. gater, and
s. h. ryu. 2016. process analytics: concepts and techniques for querying and analyzing process data .
springer.
p. bogetoft and l. otto. 2011. benchmarking with dea, sfa, and r . springer, new york, ny.
j. c. r. p. bose, w. m. p. van der aalst, i. zliobaite, and m. pechenizkiy. 2013. dealing with concept drifts in
process mining. ieee transactions on neural networks and learning systems 25, 1, 154–171.
a. burger and j. moormann. 2008. detecting intrinsic inefﬁciency on process level: benchmarking of trans-
actions in banking. in proceedings of the international conference on business process management .
146–157.
c. cabanillas, j. m. garc ´ıa, m. resinas, d. ruiz, j. mendling, and a. ruiz-cort ´es. 2013. priority-based human
resource allocation in business processes. in service-oriented computing . lecture notes in computer
science, vol. 8274. springer, 374–388.
p. ceravolo, a. azzini, e. damiani, m. lazoi, m. marra, and a. corallo. 2016. translating process min-
ing results into intelligible business information. in proceedings of the 11th international knowledge
management in organizations conference on the changing face of knowledge management impacting
society . acm, new york, ny, 14.
c. di ciccio, a. marrella, and a. russo. 2015. knowledge-intensive processes: characteristics, requirements
and analysis of contemporary approaches. journal on data semantics 4, 1, 29–57.
w. w. cooper, l. m. seiford, and j. zhu. 2011. data envelopment analysis: history, models, and interpreta-
tions. in handbook on data envelopment analysis . springer, 1–39.
s. de leeuw and j. p. van den berg. 2011. improving operational performance by inﬂuencing shopﬂoor
behavior via performance management practices. journal of operations management 29, 3, 224–235.
m. de leoni, w. m. p. van der aalst, and m. dees. 2014. a general framework for correlating business
process characteristics. in business process management . lecture notes in computer science, vol.
8659. springer, 250–266.
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.mining resource proﬁles from event logs 1:29
a. dohmen and m. leyer. 2010. combining data envelopment analysis and business process simulation for
analyzing the efﬁciency of business processes. in proceedings of the international multiconference on
engineers and computer scientists . 2134–2138.
j. h. dulebohn and r. d. johnson. 2013. human resource metrics and decision support: a classiﬁcation
framework. human resource management review 23, 1, 71–83.
m. espinilla, r. de andr ´e s ,f .j .m a r t ´ınez, and l. mart ´ınez. 2013. a 360-degree performance appraisal model
dealing with heterogeneous information and dependent criteria. information sciences 222, 459–471.
t. forsberg, l. nilsson, and m. antoni. 1999. process orientation: the swedish experience. total quality
management 10, 4–5, 540–547.
m. freel. 2016. knowledge-intensive business services: geography and innovation . routledge.
d. gujarati. 2004. basic econometrics . mcgraw-hill.
d. m. hawkins and q. deng. 2010. a nonparametric change-point control chart. journal of quality technology
42, 2, 165–173.
z. huang, x. lu, and h. duan. 2012. resource behavior measure and application in business process
management. expert systems with applications 39, 7, 6458–6468.
m. koch-rogge, g. westermann, c. wilbert, and r. willis. 2014. how are they doing? the application of data
envelopment analysis to develop a strategic performance appraisal on individual level. in r. sanchez
and a. heene (eds.), a focused issue on building new competences in dynamic environments .v o l .7 .
emerald group publishing, bingley, uk, 193–218.
a. kumar, r. dijkman, and m. song. 2013. optimal resource assignment in workﬂows for maximizing
cooperation. in business process management . lecture notes in computer science, vol. 8094. springer,
235–250.
a. leftwich (ed.). 2015. the political approach to human behaviour: people, resources and power. what is
politics: the activity and its study . polity press, cambridge, uk, 100–118.
m. leyer. 2011. towards a context-aware analysis of business process performance. in proceedings of the 15th
paciﬁc asia conference of information systems . http://www.pacis-net.org/ﬁle/2011/pacis2011-103.pdf.
m. leyer and j. moormann. 2014. how lean are ﬁnancial service companies really? empirical evidence from
a large scale study in germany. international journal of operations and production management 34,
11, 1366–1388.
j. lijfﬁjt, p. papapetrou, and k. puolamaki. 2012. size matters: finding the most informative set of window
lengths. in proceedings of the european conference on machine learning and knowledge discovery in
databases (ecml pkdd’12) . 451–466.
t. liu, y. cheng, and z. ni. 2012. mining event logs to support workﬂow resource allocation. knowledge-based
systems 35, 320–331.
l. t. ly, s. rinderle, p. dadam, and m. reichert. 2006. mining staff assignment rules from event-based data.
inproceedings of the business process management workshops . 177–190.
h. b. mann and d. r. whitney. 1947. on a test of whether one of two random variables is stochastically
larger than the other. annals of mathematical statistics 18, 1, 50–60.
t. r. manoharan, c. muralidharan, and s. g. deshmukh. 2009. employee performance appraisal using
data envelopment analysis: a case study. research and practice in human resource management 17, 1,
92–111.
d. c. montgomery, e. a. peck, and g. g. vining. 2012. introduction to linear regression analysis .j o h n
wiley & sons.
p. murphy. 1999. service performance measurement using simple techniques actually works. journal of
marketing practice: applied marketing science 5, 2, 56–73.
j. nakatumba and w. m. p. van der aalst. 2010. analyzing resource behavior using process mining. in
business process management workshops . lecture notes in business information processing, vol. 43.
springer, 69–80.
a. neely, m. gregory, and k. platts. 2005. performance measurement system design: a literature review and
research agenda. international journal of operations and production management 25, 12, 1228–1263.
a. neely, j. mills, k. platts, h. richards, m. gregory, m. bourne, and m. kennerley. 2000. performance
measurement system design: developing and testing a process-based approach. international journal
of operations and production management 20, 10, 1119–1145.
s. s. nudurupati, u. s. bititci, v. kumar, and f. t. s. chan. 2011. state of the art literature review on
performance measurement. computers and industrial engineering 60, 2, 279–290.
h. peretz and y. fried. 2012. national cultures, performance appraisal practices, and organizational absen-
teeism and turnover: a study across 21 countries. journal of applied psychology 97, 2, 448.
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.1:30 a. pika et al.
a. pika. 2015. mining process risks and resource proﬁles. ph.d. dissertation. queensland university of
technology. http://eprints.qut.edu.au/86079/.
a. pika, w. m. p. van der aalst, c. j. fidge, a. h. m. ter hofstede, and m. t. wynn. 2013a. predicting deadline
transgressions using event logs. in business process management workshops . lecture notes in business
information processing, vol. 132. springer, 211–216.
a. pika, w. m. p van der aalst, c. j. fidge, a. h. m. ter hofstede, and m. t. wynn. 2013b. proﬁling event logs
to conﬁgure risk indicators for process delays. in advanced information systems engineering .l e c t u r e
notes in computer science, vol. 7908.springer, 465–481.
a. pika, w. m. p. van der aalst, m. t. wynn, c. j. fidge, and a. h. m. ter hofstede. 2016. evaluating and
predicting overall process risk using event logs. information sciences 352, 98–120.
a. pika, m. t. wynn, c. j. fidge, a. h. m. ter hofstede, m. leyer, and w. m. p. van der aalst. 2014.
an extensible framework for analysing resource behaviour using event logs. in advanced information
systems engineering . lecture notes in computer science, vol. 8484. springer, 564–579.
j. racine and q. li. 2004. nonparametric estimation of regression functions with both categorical and
continuous data. journal of econometrics 119, 1, 99–130.
m. rosemann and j. vom brocke. 2015. the six core elements of business process management. in handbook
on business process management 1 . springer, 105–122.
g. j. ross and n. m. adams. 2012. two nonparametric control charts for detecting arbitrary distribution
changes. journal of quality technology 44, 2, 102–116.
r. sawhney and s. chason. 2005. human behavior based exploratory model for successful implementation
of lean enterprise in industry. performance improvement quarterly 18, 2, 76–96.
m. song and w. m. p. van der aalst. 2008. towards comprehensive support for organizational mining.
decision support systems 46, 1, 300–317.
j. d. sterman. 1989. modeling managerial behavior: misperceptions of feedback in a dynamic decision
making experiment. management science 35, 3, 321–339.
m. m. tavakoli and h. shirouyehzad. 2013. application of pca/dea method to evaluate the performance of
human capital management: a case study. journal of data envelopment analysis and decision science
2013, 1–20.
e. thanassoulis. 1995. assessing police forces in england and wales using data envelopment analysis.
european journal of operational research 87, 3, 641–657.
v. thevendran and m. j. mawdesley. 2004. perception of human risk factors in construction projects: an
exploratory study. international journal of project management 22, 2, 131–137.
g. m. thompson and j. c. goodale. 2006. variable employee productivity in workforce scheduling. european
journal of operational research 170, 2, 376–390.
w. m. p. van der aalst. 2010. business process simulation revisited. in enterprise and organizational
modeling and simulation . lecture notes in business information processing, vol. 63. springer, 1–14.
w. m. p. van der aalst. 2013. process cubes: slicing, dicing, rolling up and drilling down event data for
process mining. in asia paciﬁc business process management . lecture notes in business information
processing, vol. 159. springer, 1–22.
w. m. p. van der aalst. 2015. business process simulation survival guide. in handbook on business process
management 1, international handbooks on information systems , j. vom brocke and m. rosemann
(eds.). springer-verlag, berlin, germany, 337–370.
w. m. p. van der aalst. 2016. process mining: data science in action .s p r i n g e r - v e r l a g ,b e r l i n ,g e r m a n y .
http://www.springer.com/978-3-662-49850-7.
w. m. p. van der aalst, h. a. reijers, and m. song. 2005. discovering social networks from event logs.
computer supported cooperative work 14, 6, 549–593.
m. p. j. van der loo. 2010. distribution based outlier detection for univariate data. discussion paper 10003.
statistics netherlands.
j. m. wagner, d. g. shimshak, and m. a. novak. 2003. advances in physician proﬁling: the use of dea.
socio-economic planning sciences 37, 2, 141–163.
m. weske. 2007. architectures and methodologies. in business process management: concepts, languages,
architectures . springer-verlag, berlin, germany, 304–355.
r. e. white, j. n. pearson, and j. r. wilson. 1999. jit manufacturing: a survey of implementations in small
and large us manufacturers. management science 45, 1, 1–15.
j. wirtz and c. lovelock. 2016. services marketing: people, technology, strategy (8th ed.). world scientiﬁc.
received april 2016; revised september 2016; accepted december 2016
acm transactions on management information systems, vol. 8, no. 1, article 1, publication date: march 2017.