bpmj: spreadsheets for business process management
spreadsheets for business process management
using process mining to deal with \events" rather than
\numbers"
wil m.p. van der aalst
preprint, to appear in business process management journal (bpmj)
http://www.emeraldinsight.com/journal/bpmj
paper received: 3 october 2016 / paper accepted: 15 january 2017
abstract
purpose - process mining provides a generic collection of techniques to turn
event data into valuable insights, improvement ideas, predictions, and recom-
mendations. this paper uses spreadsheets as a metaphor to introduce process
mining as an essential tool for data scientists and business analysts. the goal
is to illustrate that process mining can do with events what spreadsheets can
do with numbers.
design/methodology/approach - the paper discusses the main concepts
in both spreadsheets and process mining. using a concrete data set as a
running example the dierent types of process mining are explained. where
spreadsheets work with numbers, process mining starts from event data with
the aim to analyze processes.
findings - dierences and commonalities between spreadsheets and process
mining are described. unlike process mining tools like prom, spreadsheets pro-
grams cannot be used to discover processes, check compliance, analyze bottle-
necks, animate event data, and provide operational process support. pointers
to existing process mining tools and their functionality are given.
practical implications - event logs and operational processes can be found
everywhere and process mining techniques are not limited to specic appli-
cation domains. comparable to spreadsheet software widely used in nance,
wil m.p. van der aalst
process and data science (pads), department of computer science, rwth aachen uni-
versity, 52056 aachen, germany.
e-mail: wvdaalst@pads.rwth-aachen.de2 wil m.p. van der aalst
production, sales, education, and sports, process mining software can be used
in a broad range of organizations.
originality/value - the paper provides an original view on process mining
by relating it to spreadsheets. the value of spreadsheet-like technology tailored
towards the analysis of behavior rather than numbers is illustrated by the over
20 commercial process mining tools available today and the growing adoption
in a variety of application domains.
keywords - process mining, business process management (bpm), spread-
sheets, data science
1 introduction
spreadsheets are used everywhere. a spreadsheet is composed of cells orga-
nized in rows and columns. some cells serve as input, other cells have val-
ues computed over a collection of other cells (e.g., taking the sum over an
array of cells). visicalc was the \killer application" for the apple ii com-
puter in 1979 and lotus 1-2-3 played a comparable role for the ibm pc in
1983. people were buying these computers in order to run spreadsheet software
[ceruzzi, 2003]: a nice example of the \tail" ( visicalc /lotus 1-2-3 ) wagging
the \dog" (apple-ii/ibm pc). after decades of spectacular it-developments,
spreadsheet software can still be found on most computers (e.g. excel is part
of microsoft's oce ) and can be accessed online (e.g., google sheets as part
ofgoogle docs ). spreadsheet software survived 50 years of it-developments
because spreadsheets are highly generic and valuable for many. the situations
in which spreadsheets can be used in a meaningful way are almost endless
[jelen, 2005]. spreadsheets can be used to do anything with numbers. of course
one needs to write dedicated programs if computations get complex or use
database technology if data sets get large. however, for the purpose of this
paper we assume that spreadsheets adequately deal with numerical data. we
would like to argue that process mining software enables users to do anything
with events . in this paper, we introduce process mining against the backdrop
of spreadsheets.
instead of numbers we consider discrete events , i.e., things that have hap-
pened and could be recorded. events may take place inside a machine (e.g.,
an atm or baggage handling system), inside an enterprise information system
(e.g., a purchase decision or salary payment), inside a hospital (e.g., making
an x-ray), inside a social network (e.g., sending a twitter message), inside a
transportation system (e.g., checking in at an airport), etc. events may be
\life events", \machine events", or \organization events". the term internet
of events (ioe), coined in [aalst, 2014], refers to all event data available. the
ioe is roughly composed of the internet of content (ioc), the internet of peo-
ple (iop), internet of things (iot), and internet of locations (iol). these are
overlapping, e.g., a tweet sent by a mobile phone from a particular location isspreadsheets for business process management 3
in the intersection of iop and iol. process mining aims to exploit event data
in a meaningful way , for example, to provide insights, identify bottlenecks, an-
ticipate problems, record policy violations, recommend countermeasures, and
streamline processes [aalst, 2016].
process mining should be in the toolbox of data scientists, business an-
alysts, and others who need to analyze event data. unfortunately, process
mining is not yet a widely adopted technology. surprisingly, the process per-
spective is absent in the majority of big data initiatives and data science
curricula. we argue that event data should be used to improve end-to-end
processes: it is not sucient to consider \numbers" and isolated activities.
data science approaches tend to be process agonistic whereas business process
management (bpm) approaches tend to be model-driven without considering
the \evidence" hidden in the data [aalst, 2013].
developments in bpm have resulted in a well-established set of princi-
ples, methods and tools that combine knowledge from information technology,
management sciences and industrial engineering for the purpose of improving
business processes [weske, 2007,aalst, 2013,dumas et al., 2013]. bpm can be
viewed as a continuation of the workow management (wfm) wave in the
the nineties. the maturity of wfm/bpm is partly reected by a range of
books:
{[jablonski & bussler, 1996] (rst comprehensive wfm book focusing on
the dierent workow perspectives and the mobile language),
{[leymann & roller, 1999] (book on production wfm systems closely re-
lated to ibm's workow products),
{[aalst et al., 2000] (edited book that served as the basis for the bpm con-
ference series),
{[aalst & hee, 2004] (most cited wfm book; a petri net-based approach is
used to model, analyze and enact workow processes),
{[muehlen, 2004] (book relating wfm systems to operational performance),
{[dumas et al., 2005] (edited book on process-aware information systems),
{[smith & fingar, 2006] (visionary book linking management perspectives
to the pi calculus),
{[weske, 2007] (book presenting the foundations of bpm, including dierent
languages and architectures),
{[hofstede et al., 2010] (book based on yawl and the workow patterns),
{[brocke & rosemann, 2010,brocke & rosemann, 2014] (handbooks on busi-
ness process management),
{[becker et al., 2011] (book on the design of process-oriented organizations),
{[reichert & weber, 2012] (book on supporting exibility in process-aware
information systems), and
{[dumas et al., 2013] (tutorial-style book covering the whole bpm lifecy-
cle).
as mentioned, wfm/bpm approaches tend to be model-driven. notable ex-
ceptions are the process mining approaches developed over the last decade
[aalst, 2016].4 wil m.p. van der aalst
process mining can be seen as a means to bridge the gap between data sci-
ence and classical process management (wfm/bpm) [aalst, 2013]. by fram-
ing process mining as a spreadsheet-like technology for event data, we hope to
increase awareness in the information systems community.
the remainder of this paper is organized as follows. section 2 introduces a
concrete data set which will be used as a running example. by using an easy-to-
understand business setting to introduce both spreadsheets and process min-
ing, we can explain their dierences and commonalities. section 3 summarizes
the basic concepts used by spreadsheet software like excel and also describes
the relevance of spreadsheets in a historical context. section 4 demonstrates
that process mining technology can be positioned as spreadsheets to analyze
dynamic behavior rather than numbers. process mining techniques such as
process discovery and conformance checking are illustrated using the running
example. section 5 concludes the paper.
2 running example
as an example, let us consider the process of handling customer orders. cus-
tomers can order phones via the website of a telecom company. the customer
rst places an order. multiple phones of the same type can be ordered at the
same time. the customer is expected to pay before the phones are delivered.
an invoice is sent to the customer, but the customer can also pay before re-
ceiving the invoice. if the customer does not pay in time, a reminder is sent.
this is only done after sending the invoice. if the customer does not pay after
two reminders, the order is canceled. if the customer pays, the order's delivery
is prepared, followed by the actual delivery and a conformation of payment
(in any order).
figure 1 shows some event data recorded for our order handling process.
each row corresponds to an event, i.e., the execution of an activity for a
particular order. the highlighted row refers to the sending of a reminder for
order 1677 on 11/10/2015. there may be multiple rows (i.e., events) related
to the same order. for example, the small fragment shows three events related
to order 1672 (see red lines). order 1672 consists of six events in total. this
is close to the average number of events per order (6.38).
whereas figure 1 shows the \raw" events, figure 2 shows more high-
level data with precisely one row per order. for example, all events related
to order 1672 are \collapsed" into a single row. there are 10,000 orders. per
order we can see the quantity, number of phones ordered, and a zip code with
street number (plus possible sux) uniquely identifying an address in the
netherlands.
the data sets shown in figure 1 and figure 2 will be used to introduce
process mining techniques and to relate these to spreadsheet-based analysis.spreadsheets for business process management 5
each row corresponds to an 
event (there are 63,763 events )
order number activity timestamp additional data 
attributesorder 
1672
fig. 1 small fragment of a larger event log holding 63,763 events.
each row 
corresponds to an 
order (there are 
10,000 orders )product type (one 
per order )price per phone number of phones dutch address (zip 
code and street 
number )
fig. 2 fragment of a data set with one row per order (10,000 orders in total).
3 spreadsheets: history and concepts
most organizations use spreadsheets in nancial planning, budgeting, work
distribution, etc. hence, it is interesting to view process mining against the
backdrop of this widely used technology.6 wil m.p. van der aalst
3.1 history
richard mattessich pioneered computerized spreadsheets in the early 1960-
ties. mattessich realized that doing repeated \what-if" analyses by hand is
not productive. he described the basic principles (computations on cells in a
matrix) of today's spreadsheets in [mattessich, 1964] and provided some initial
fortran iv code written by his assistants tom schneider and paul zitlau. the
ideas were not widely adopted because few organizations owned computers.
rene pardo and remy landau created in 1969 the lanpar (language for
programming arrays at random) electronic spreadsheet already allowing for
forward references and natural order recalculation (handling cells that depend
on one another). again the market did not seem ready for spreadsheet software.
1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010richard mattessich 
introduces the concept of 
an electronic spreadsheet 
(1961 -1964 )
launch of visicalc 
($99): killer application 
for apple ii computer
(1979 )launch of lotus 1-2-3 
($495): killer 
application for ibm pc
(1983 )launch of excel 
($385) for 
macintosh
(1985 )launch of 
excel 2.0  for 
windows 
(1987 )excel 16.0 
current 
version 
(2015 )
launch of google 
sheets : running 
in the cloud
(2006 )launch of 
apple’s numbers 
running on ipad
(2010 )lanpar – language 
for programming 
arrays at random
(1969 )
fig. 3 timeline showing a few milestones in the history of spreadsheet technology (1960-
2015).
the rst widely used spreadsheet program was visicalc (\visible calcu-
lator") developed by dan bricklin and bob frankston, founders of software
arts (later named visicorp). visicalc was released in 1979 for the apple ii
computer. it is generally considered as apple ii's \killer application", because
numerous organizations purchased the apple ii computer just to be able to
usevisicalc . in the years that followed the software was ported to other plat-
forms including the apple iii, ibm pc, commodore pet, and atari. in the
same period supercalc (1980) and multiplan (1982) were released following
the success of visicalc .
lotus development corporation was founded in 1982 by mitch kapor and
jonathan sachs. they developed lotus 1-2-3 , named after the three ways the
product could be used: as a spreadsheet, as a graphics package, and as a
database manager. when lotus 1-2-3 was launched in 1983, visicalc sales
dropped dramatically. lotus 1-2-3 took full advantage of ibm pc's capabili-
ties and better supported data handling and charting. what visicalc was for
apple ii, lotus 1-2-3 was for ibm pc. for the second time, a spreadsheet pro-
gram generated a tremendous growth in computer sales [rakovic et al., 2014].spreadsheets for business process management 7
lotus 1-2-3 dominated the spreadsheet market until 1992. the dominance
ended with the uptake of microsoft windows.
microsoft's excel was released in 1985. microsoft originally sold the spread-
sheet program multiplan , but replaced it by excel in an attempt to compete
with lotus 1-2-3 . the software was rst released for the macintosh computer in
1985. microsoft released excel 2.0 in 1987 which included a run-time version of
ms windows. five years later, excel was market leader and became immensely
popular as an integral part of the microsoft's oce suite. borland's quattro
which was released in 1988 competed together with lotus 1-2-3 against excel ,
but could not sustain a reasonable market share. excel has dominated the
spreadsheet market over the last 25 years. in 2015, the 16th release of excel
became available.
online cloud-based spreadsheets such as google sheets (part of google docs
since 2006) provide spreadsheet functionality in a web browser. numbers is a
spreadsheet application developed by apple available on iphones, ipads (ios),
and macs (os x). dozens of other spreadsheet apps are available via google
play or apple's app store.
figure 3 summarizes 55 years of spreadsheet history. the key point is that
spreadsheets have been one of the primary reasons to use computers in business
environments.
3.2 basic concepts
in a spreadsheet (sometimes called worksheet), data and formulas are arranged
over cells grouped in rows and columns. in excel multiple worksheets can be
combined into a workbook. here, we only consider the spreadsheet depicted
in figure 4.
in a spreadsheet, each row is represented by a number and each column is
represented by a letter. cell a1is the cell where the rst row ( 1) and column
(a) meet. cell d9968 in figure 4 has value 4 indicating that 4 iphones
were ordered. a cell may have a concrete value or may be computed using an
expression operating on any number of cell values.
in figure 4, row 1 is a header row containing column names. rows 2 until
10,001 and columns auntil econtain the data values already explained in
figure 2. row fhas 10,000 cells whose values are computed using the values
in columns dandc. the expression associated to a cell may use a range
of arithmetic operations (add, subtract, multiply, etc.) and predened func-
tions (e.g., taking the sum over an array of cells). excel provides hundreds
of functions including statistical functions, math and trigonometry functions,
nancial functions, and logical functions. the value of cell i9969 was obtained
by taking the sum over all values in row f: the total value of all orders summed
up toe14,028,176.20.
figure 4 also shows a so-called pivot table automatically summarizing the
data. the pivot table shows the sales per type of phone, both in term of items
and revenue. the pie chart shows that the \apple iphone 6 16 gb" was sold8 wil m.p. van der aalst
cellcolumn
dcomputed cell
=d9968 *c9968
=4*€ 639.00
=€ 2556 .00
pivot 
tablepie 
chartbar 
chartcomputed 
cells
input 
datarow 
9968
fig. 4 example spreadsheet analyzing the sales per product.
most (7339 phones). the bar chart shows the distribution in terms of revenue.
the \apple iphone 6s plus 64 gb" ranks 5th although only 1059 phones
were sold.
3.3 analyzing event data?
although spreadsheet software is very generic and oers many functions, pro-
grams like excel are not suitable for analyzing event data. in section 3.2 we
analyzed the data of figure 2 using simple operations such as multiplication,
division, counting, and summation. when analyzing dynamic behavior such
operations are not suitable. consider for example the event data in figure 1.
we can count the number of events per case using a pivot table. however,
spreadsheet software cannot be used to analyze bottlenecks and deviations.
the process notion is completely missing in spreadsheets. processes cannot be
captured in numerical data and operations like summation.spreadsheets for business process management 9
4 process mining: spreadsheets for dynamic behavior
as argued in the previous section, spreadsheet software can be used to do
anything with numbers. however, spreadsheets cannot capture processes and
cannot handle event data well. therefore, we propose process mining as a
spreadsheet-like technology for processes starting from events.
4.1 event logs
starting point for any process mining eort is a collection of events commonly
referred to as an event log (although events can also be stored in a database).
each event is characterized by:
{acase (also called process instance ), e.g., an order number, a patient id,
or a business trip,
{anactivity , e.g., \evaluate request" or \inform customer",
{atimestamp , e.g., \2015-11-23t06:38:50+00:00",
{additional (optional) attributes such as the resource executing the corre-
sponding event, the type of event (e.g., start, complete, schedule, abort),
thelocation of the event, or the costs of an event.
all events corresponding to a case (i.e. process instance) form a trace. the
order of events in a trace is determined by the timestamps. if we focus on
activity names only, we can represent the trace corresponding to order 1672
by the sequence: place order ,pay,send invoice ,prepare delivery ,make delivery ,
conrm payment . an event log is a collection of events that can be grouped
into traces. dedicated formats such as xes (www.xes-standard.org ) and
mxml exist to store events data in an unambiguous manner.
event logs can be used for a wide variety of process mining techniques. fig-
ure 1 shows an event log. the rst three columns correspond to the mandatory
attributes (case, activity, and timestamp). cases correspond to orders in this
example.
an event log provides a view on reality. just like a workbook in excel may
hold multiple worksheets, we may consider multiple processes or multiple views
on the same process. sometimes multiple case notions are possible providing
dierent views on the same event data. however, for simplicity, we consider
only one, relatively simple, event log (like the one in figure 1) as input for
process mining here.
process mining seeks the confrontation between event data (i.e., observed
behavior) and process models (hand-made or discovered automatically). the
interest in process mining is rising. this is reected by the availability of com-
mercial tools like disco (fluxicon), celonis process mining (celonis), process-
gold enterprise platform (processgold), aris ppm (software ag), qpr
processanalyzer (qpr), snp business process analysis (snp ag), minit
(gradient ecm), myinvenio (cognitive technology), perceptive processing
mining (lexmark), etc. (see section 4.8). in the academic world, prom is10 wil m.p. van der aalst
the de-facto standard ( www.processmining.org ) and research groups all over
the world have contributed to the hundreds of prom plug-ins available. all
analysis results depicted in this paper were obtained using prom.
4.2 exploring event data
starting from an event log like the one in figure 1, we can explore the set of
events. simple descriptive statistics can be applied to the event log, e.g., the
average ow time of cases or the percentage of cases completed within one
week. univariate statistical analysis focuses on a single variable like ow time,
including its central tendency (including the mean, median, and mode) and
dispersion (including the range and quantiles of the data-set, and measures
of spread such as the variance and standard deviation). bivariate statistical
analysis focuses on the relationship between variables, e.g., correlation. how-
ever, to get a good feel for the behavior captured in the event log, one needs
to look beyond basic descriptive statistics.
(a) case duration sorted on order number (b) case duration sorted on duration
(c) distribution of events over day (d) distribution of events over weekcolor of dot 
indicates 
activity
time since start 
of casecases sorted by 
durationseasonal 
pattern (5x)
time since start 
of caseplace order
send invoice
pay
send reminder
prepare delivery
confirm payment
make delivery
cancel order
night evening
morninglunchtime
afternoonsunday
monday wednesdaytuesday thursday
fridaysaturday1
2
3
4
5
fig. 5 exploring the event log using prom 's dotted charts.
figure 5 shows four so-called \dotted charts" for the data set shown in
figure 1. each of the four charts shows 63,763 dots arranged over 10,000 rows.
the color of the dot refers to the corresponding activity. see the legend inspreadsheets for business process management 11
figure 5(b) for the mapping, e.g., the dark blue dot refers to activity place
order . in all four diagrams, the x-axis refers to a temporal property of the
event and the y-axis refers to the corresponding case (i.e., customer order).
in figure 5(a) the time since the start of the case is used for the x-axis.
all orders start with a blue dot at time zero indicating that cases start with
activity place order . the colored bands show that activities tend to happen
in certain periods, e.g., the rst reminder (if any) is typically sent after a
week. one can also see clearly seasonal patterns; at certain periods ow times
are considerably longer. figure 5(a) shows ve such periods. in figure 5(b)
the cases are sorted based on their ow time. the top cases take the least
time to completion; the bottom cases take the longest. again one can see
clear patterns. for example, cases that take longer have multiple reminders.
figure 5(c) shows the distribution of events over the day. most activities take
place during oce hours. one can also note the eect of lunch breaks. during
the night we only see blue and purple dots indicating the placing of orders
and payments. these activities are done by customers not bound to oce
hours. figure 5(d) shows the distribution of events over the week. again we
can clearly notice that, apart from placing of orders and making payments,
most activities take place during oce hours and not during weekends.
figure 5 provides insights that get lost if events are aggregated into num-
bers. unlike spreadsheets, process mining treats concepts such as case (x-axis),
time (y-axis), and activity (color dot) as rst-class citizens during analysis.
4.3 process discovery
most of process mining research focused on the discovery of process models
from event data [aalst, 2016]. the process model should be able to capture
causalities, choices, concurrency, and loops. process discovery is a notoriously
dicult problem because event logs are often far from complete and there
are at least four competing quality dimensions: (1) tness , (2) simplicity , (3)
precision , and (4) generalization . a model with good tness allows for most of
the behavior seen in the event log. a model has a perfect tness if all traces
in the log can be replayed by the model from beginning to end. the simplest
model that can explain the behavior seen in the log is the best model. this
principle is known as occam's razor. fitness and simplicity alone are not
sucient to judge the quality of a discovered process model. for example, it is
very easy to construct an extremely simple process model that is able to replay
all traces in an event log (but also any other event log referring to the same
set of activities). similarly, it is undesirable to have a model that only allows
for the exact behavior seen in the event log. remember that the log contains
only example behavior and that many traces that are possible may not have
been observed yet. a model is precise if it does not allow for \too much"
behavior. a model that is not precise is \undertting", i.e., the model allows
for behaviors very dierent from what was seen in the log. at the same time,
the model should generalize and not restrict behavior to just the examples12 wil m.p. van der aalst
seen in the log. a model that does not generalize is \overtting". overtting
means that an overly specic model is generated whereas it is obvious that
the log only holds example behavior (i.e., the model explains the particular
sample log, but there is a high probability that the model is unable to explain
the next batch of cases).
the discussion above shows that process discovery needs to deal with var-
ious trade-os. therefore, most process discovery algorithms have parameters
to inuence the result. hence, dierent models can be created based on the
questions at hand.
(a) process model discovered using the inductive miner without filtering 
(b) process model discovered without two low -frequent activities 
(c) process model discovered for happy path 
(d) process model discovered using the ilp miner 
fig. 6 four process models automatically discovered using prom 'sinductive miner and
ilp miner .
over the last decade there have been tremendous advances in automated
process discovery. figure 6 shows four process models discovered for the data
set consisting of 63,763 events related to 10,000 orders. the rst three mod-
els have been discovered using the inductive miner [leemans et al., 2014,
leemans et al., 2015] and the last one was discovered using the ilp miner
[werf et al., 2010,zelst et al., 2015]. these models could have been automati-
cally converted to bpmn models [dumas et al., 2013] or other notations like
uml activity diagrams, statecharts, epcs, and the like. however, to see some
of the important subtleties, we keep the native representation used by these
process discovery techniques. (for example, a straightforward mapping of thespreadsheets for business process management 13
petri net in figure 6(d) to a bpmn model having precisely the same behavior
is impossible.)
figure 6(a) shows a perfectly tting process model showing all eight ac-
tivities. each case starts with the placement of an order and ends with a
cancellation, a delivery, or a conrmation of payment. the diamond shaped
\+" nodes correspond to and-splits/joins. all other splits/joins are of type
xor. figure 6(b) shows a perfectly tting process model after automatically
removing the two least frequent activities. note that the placement of an order
is always followed by the sending of an invoice and sometimes by a payment.
for 1,258 orders there was no payment as shown by the number on the arc
bypassing activity pay. figure 6(c) shows another automatically discovered
process model, but now the inductive miner was asked to uncover the \happy
path" (i.e., the most frequent behavior). in this idealized model all customer
pay (either before or after receiving the invoice), there are no cancelations, the
order is always delivered, and payment is always conrmed.
figure 6(a) is perfectly tting but not very precise. using the ilp miner we
discovered the petri net shown in figure 6(d). using petri nets we can express
things missing in the earlier diagrams. for example, figure 6(d) shows that
cancelation only takes place after sending the invoice and missing payment. if
the customer pays before cancelation, the order is eventually delivered. more-
over, reminders are only sent after sending the invoice and before payment.
each of the four models could be discovered in a few seconds on a normal
laptop. note that the discovered process model is not the end-goal of process
mining: it is the backbone for further analysis!
4.4 checking compliance
the second type of process mining is conformance checking [aalst, 2016]. here,
an existing process model is compared with an event log of the same process.
conformance checking can be used to check if reality, as recorded in the log,
conforms to the model and vice versa. the process model used as input may
be hand-made or discovered. to check compliance often a normative hand-
crafted model is used. however, to nd exceptional cases, one can also use a
discovered process model showing the mainstream behavior. it is also possible
to \repair" process models based on event data.
to illustrate the kind of results conformance checking may deliver, consider
figure 7. the original event log with 63,763 events is replayed on a process
model that describes the \happy ow", i.e., the path followed by orders that
are paid in time and not canceled. the model is represented as a petri net
in figure 7(a), but is from a behavioral point of view identical to figure 6(c)
(i.e., the model discovered based on the most frequent behavior). the replay
results show that there are 1,258 cases for which a payment and delivery were
both missing.14 wil m.p. van der aalst
 for 1258 cases 
there was no 
paymentthe orders without 
payment were also 
not delivered
2916 conforming 
cases
1791 cases having  
one reminder
(move on log )
1258 canceled orders
(moves on log & 
moves on model )(a) model view showing where model does not fit reality
(b) log view showing where reality does not fit model move on model 
(should have happened )move on log 
(should not have happened )
fig. 7 conformance checking as a means to show deviations between observed and modeled
behavior.
the diagnostics in figure 7 are based on so-called alignments , i.e., traces in
the event log are mapped onto nearest paths in the model [aalst et al., 2012].
basically, there are two types of deviations:
{move on model : an activity was supposed to happen according to the
model but did not happen in reality, i.e., the corresponding event was
missing in the event log. such deviations are indicated in purple.
{move on log : an activity happened in reality but was not supposed to
happen at this stage according to the model, i.e., there is an event in the
log that was not allowed at that point in time. such deviations are indicated
in yellow.
figure 7(a) shows a model-based view with conformance diagnostics. the small
purple lines at the bottom of the four highlighted activities show the moves
on model. for example, activity prepare delivery was skipped 1,258 times.
the yellow places correspond to states where activities happened in reality,
but were not allowed according to the model. figure 7(b) shows a log-based
conformance view. again the colors indicate deviations.
using conformance checking one can analyze the severity of the dierent
types of deviations. it is also possible to select cases having a specic type
of deviation and automatically see what dierentiates them from conform-
ing cases. in this way, we can learn about the root causes of non-conforming
behavior.spreadsheets for business process management 15
4.5 analyzing performance
using the notion of alignments, we can replay any event log on the corre-
sponding model even when there are deviations. recall that each event in the
log has a timestamp (third column in figure 1). while replaying the event
log we can take into account these timestamps and measure the time spent
in-between activities. this way we can analyze waiting times. if logs have
both start and complete events for activities, we can also measure the dura-
tion of such activities. if event logs also have resource information, we can
detect over/under-utilization of resources. hence, while replaying we can get
all information needed for performance analysis.
on average it 
takes 6.01 days 
to send an 
invoice
no waiting time 
because place order 
is the first activity
preparation of the 
delivery is often 
delayed because of the 
invoice and not the 
actual payment after preparation the 
delivery is done within 
a day (on average )send invoice statistics
frequency : 10,000 times
minimum waiting time : 33.2 minutes
maximum waiting time : 23.00 days
mean waiting time : 6.01 days
standard deviation : 3.53 days
fig. 8 average waiting times for activities computed by replaying the whole event log.
all 63,763 events in figure 1 are complete events. therefore, we can only
analyze the times in-between activities. figure 8 shows the mean waiting times
for activities using the model discovered by the ilp miner (cf. figure 6(d)).
next to the mean we can show the minimum, maximum, median, standard
deviation, variance, etc. the main bottleneck in the process seems to be the
sending of invoices. it is also possible to select cases taking longer than some
normative time and see what dierentiates them from the other cases. this
allows us to diagnose bottlenecks and generate ideas for process improvement.
4.6 process animation
replaying the event log using alignments can be used to generate animations
of the process. these are computed based on both the model and event data.
instead of showing a diagram like in figure 8, we can show a \process movie".
figure 9 shows snapshots of an animation created using a model discovered
by the inductive miner . figure 9(a) shows the status of the overall process
(without activity send reminder ) at a particular point in time. the moving16 wil m.p. van der aalst
yellow dots refer to orders recorded in the event log. figure 9(b) zooms-in on
the last part of the model. figure 9(c) shows the queues for the payand send
invoice activities.
(a) replaying the event log on the model
(b) zooming in on last part of model (c) queue lengths during replayactual orders26 orders that have been 
placed still need to be 
paid 
fig. 9 animations created using the event in figure 1 and a discovered process model.
process animations (like the one shown in figure 9) help to build consensus
in process improvement projects. in most reengineering projects, some stake-
holders tend to question numerical arguments or data quality to avoid painful
conclusions. however, objectively visualizing the developments in a process
(process animation) with the ability to drill down to individual cases, leaves
no room for biased interpretations. this helps to shortcut discussions and take
the actions needed.
4.7 operational support
thus far we only discussed process mining in a oine setting. this helps to
understand and improve compliance and performance issues. however, process
mining can also be applied in an online setting [aalst, 2016]. we would like
to predict delays, warn for risks, and recommend counter measures. compare
this to the weather forecast. we are less interested in historic weather data
if these cannot be used to predict today's or tomorrow's weather. sometimes
delays or risks are partly unavoidable; however, it is valuable to predict them
at a point in time where stakeholders can still inuence the process.
most process mining techniques can be employed for operational support,
i.e., inuencing running processes on-the-y rather than redesigning them
[aalst, 2016]. for example, cases that have not completed yet can be replayed
and combined with historic information. consider for example figure 9(c),
showing queue lengths at a particular point in time. such information can
also be provided at runtime. compare this to the use of doppler radar to lo-
cate precipitation, calculate its motion, and estimate its type (e.g., rain, snow,
or hail).
stochastic process models with probabilities and delay distributions dis-
covered from event data can be used to predict the trajectory of a runningspreadsheets for business process management 17
(a) event data and process model (b) weather forecast (c) weather radar
fig. 10 operational support using process mining: event data and process models (a) are
used to create a \process forecast" (b) and a \process radar" (c).
case or a group of cases (like the weather radar). moreover, process models
can be continuously revised based on the latest event data. figure 10 aims
to convey the relationship between process analytics and weather information.
operational support is challenging|just like predicting the weather|and only
provides reliable results if the process's behavior is indeed predictable.
4.8 tool support
the successful application of process mining relies on good tool support. prom
is the leading open-source process mining tool. the lion's share of academic
research is conducted by using and extending prom (and related variants such
as rapidprom). many of the commercial process mining tools are based on
ideas rst developed in the context of prom. table 1 shows an overview of some
of the current tools. the functionality of these tools is summarized in table 2.
note that the process mining eld is developing rapidly, so the information is
likely to be outdated soon. however, the two tables provide a snapshot of the
current tools and their capabilities.
most tools support xes ( www.xes-standard.org ), the ocial ieee stan-
dard for exchanging event data. all tools support process discovery and per-
formance analysis, i.e., all can automatically create a process model highlight-
ing the bottlenecks in the process. there is limited support for conformance
checking. scalability issues (e.g., computing alignments may be too time con-
suming) and informal semantics (e.g., not being able to distinguish between
and-joins and xor-joins) are some of the hurdles commercial vendors are
facing. note that in table 2 the comparison of two process model graphs is not
considered as a way to support compliance checking (e.g., myinvenio supports
this). in our view, compliance checking requires replaying observed behavior
on a model that has clear semantics. most vendors support animation, but
operational support (e.g., recommending the next activity to be executed or
predicting future bottlenecks) is rarely supported.18 wil m.p. van der aalst
short name full name of tool version vendor webpage
celonis celonis process mining 4 celonis gmbh www.celonis.de
disco disco 1.9.5 fluxicon www.uxicon.com
fujitsu interstage business process manager analytics 12.2 fujitsu ltd www.fujitsu.com
icaro icaro everflow 1 icaro tech www.icarotech.com
icris icris process mining factory 1 icris www.processminingfactory.com
lana lana process mining 1 lana labs www.lana-labs.com
minit minit 1 gradient ecm www.minitlabs.com
myinvenio myinvenio 1 cognitive technology www.my-invenio.com
perceptive perceptive process mining 2.7 lexmark www.lexmark.com
processgold processgold enterprise platform 8 processgold international b.v. www.processgold.com
prom prom 6.6 open source hosted at tu/e www.promtools.org
prom lite prom lite 1.1 open source hosted at tu/e www.promtools.org
qpr qpr processanalyzer 2015.5 qpr www.qpr.com
rapidprom rapidprom 4.0.0 open source hosted at tu/e www.rapidprom.org
rialto rialto process 1.5 exeura www.exeura.eu
signavio signavio process intelligence 2016 signavio gmbh www.signavio.com
snp snp business process analysis 15.27 snp schneider-neureither partner ag www.snp-bpa.com
ppm webmethods process performance manager 9.9 software ag www.softwareag.com
worksoft worksoft analyze and process mining for sap 2016 worksoft, inc. www.worksoft.com
table 1 overview of available process mining tools (not intended to be incomplete)spreadsheets for business process management 19
name of tool xes support process discovery compliance checking performance analysis process animation operational support
celonis yes yes yes yes yes no
disco yes yes no yes yes no
fujitsu no yes no yes no no
icaro no yes no yes no no
icris yes yes no yes no no
lana yes yes yes yes no no
minit yes yes no yes yes no
myinvenio yes yes no yes yes no
perceptive no yes no yes yes no
processgold yes yes no yes yes no
prom yes yes no yes yes no
prom lite yes yes no yes yes no
qpr yes yes no yes yes no
rapidprom yes yes no yes yes no
rialto yes yes no yes no no
signavio no no yes yes no no
snp yes yes no yes no no
ppm no yes no yes no no
worksoft no yes no yes no no
table 2 process mining tasks supported by tool. disclaimer: this table is based on the
information currently available. the functionality of tools is changing rapidly, so please
consult the vendor for the most recent information.20 wil m.p. van der aalst
as mentioned, tables 1 and 2 merely provide a snapshot. however, they
illustrate the emergence of a new class of tools able to analyze event data in
a truly generic manner.
5 conclusion
just like spreadsheet software, process mining aims to provide a generic ap-
proach not restricted to a particular application domain. whereas spreadsheets
focus on numbers , process mining focuses on events . there have been some at-
tempts to extend spreadsheets with process mining capabilities. for example,
qpr's processanalyzer can be deployed as an excel add-in. however, pro-
cesses and events are very dierent from bar/pie charts and numbers. process
models and concepts related to cases, events, activities, timestamps, and re-
sources need to be treated as rst-class citizens during analysis. data mining
tools and spreadsheet programs take as input any tabular data without dis-
tinguishing between these key concepts. as a result, such tools tend to be
process-agnostic.
5.1 comparison of concepts
table 3 summarizes some of the main concepts in spreadsheets and process
mining. the event notion does not exist in spreadsheets. spreadsheets can pro-
duce a variety of charts, but cannot discover a process model from event data.
the input for process mining is an event log that consists of events grouped
incases . each case (also called process instance) is described by a sequence
of events. events may have any number of attributes . each event refers to
anactivity and has a timestamp . an event may also refer to a resource (per-
son, machine, software component, etc.) and carry transactional information
(start, complete, suspend, etc.). based on event data a process model can be
discovered showing bottlenecks, mainstream behavior, exceptional execution
paths, etc. a process model can also be given as input to conduct conformance
checking or to enrich or repair process models. any type of process model can
be used as long as it can be related to sequences of events. table 3 shows that
discovered models, social networks, compliance diagnostics, predictions, and
recommendations are possible outputs of process mining activities. the table
also shows that the concepts are as generic as the concepts one can nd in a
spreadsheet.
5.2 challenges
still we can learn from spreadsheets and improve the accessibility of process
mining. the direct manipulation of data combined with a large repertoire of
functions is very powerful. moreover, spreadsheets implicity encode analysisspreadsheets for business process management 21
spreadsheet process mining
input worksheet event log
cell event
row case (process instance)
column activity
timestamp
resource
type (start, complete,
abort, etc.)
normative process model
output bar charts, pie charts,
area charts, radar
charts, etc.discovered process models
(control-ow and possibly
other perspectives)
pivot tables social networks
sums, averages, stan-
dard deviations, etc.deviations (e.g., align-
ments)
bottlenecks
process-aware predictions
and recommendations
table 3 summary of the main concepts in spreadsheets and process mining. concepts such
as case, event, activity, timestamp, and resource do not exist in spreadsheets.
workows. intermediate results stored in cells can be used as input for sub-
sequent analysis steps. in this context we would like to refer to rapidprom
[mans et al., 2014] which supports process mining workows in a visual man-
ner.
the spectacular growth of event data provides many opportunities for auto-
mated process discovery based on facts. event logs can be replayed on process
models to check conformance and analyze bottlenecks. however, still missing
are reliable techniques to automatically improve operational processes. ex-
isting process mining techniques can be used to diagnose problems, but the
transition from \as-is" to \to-be" models is not yet supported adequately.
since the rst industrial revolution, productivity has been increasing be-
cause of technical innovations, improvements in the organization of work, and
the use of information technology. frederick taylor (1856-1915) introduced the
initial principles of scientic management. in his book \the principles of sci-
entic management" he proposed to standardize best practices and suggested
techniques for the elimination of waste and ineciencies [taylor, 1919]. these
ideas have matured and approaches have been developed over the last century.
business process management (bpm) follows the same tradition. however, the
abundance of (event) data is changing the bpm landscape rapidly. today, we
are witnessing the fourth industrial revolution (\industrie 4.0"). operations
management, and in particular operations research, is a branch of management
science heavily relying on modeling. here a variety of mathematical models
ranging from linear programming and project planning to queueing models,
markov chains, and simulation are used. these models often focus on a par-
ticular decision (at run-time or at design-time) rather than the process as a
whole . the \holy grail" of scientic management has been to automatically22 wil m.p. van der aalst
improve operational processes, i.e., to observe a process as it is unfolding and
us this to provide clear and reliable suggestions for improvement. although the
practical value of evidence-based automated process optimization is evident,
it has only been realized for rather specic operational decisions. however,
the omnipresence of event data and the availability of reliable and fast process
mining techniques make it possible to discover faithful control-ow models and
to align reality with these discovered models. this creates new opportunities
for scientic management.
the focus of future process mining research should be on automatically
improving processes by changing the underlying process models or by better
controlling existing ones. how to do this?
{starting point should be the discovered as-is models. these models and
the event data can be used for comparative process mining. given multiple
variants of the same process, the same process in dierent periods, or dif-
ferent types of cases within the same process, we can discover characteristic
commonalities and dierences while exploiting the underlying event data.
this provides novel diagnostic information aiming at better understanding
the factors inuencing performance.
{the as-is model can also be used for predictive analytics, e.g., predicting
the remaining ow time for a running case or recommending a suitable
resource at run-time.
{it is also possible to combine the as-is model with so-called change con-
straints. here also domain knowledge is used to determine the \degrees of
freedom" in redesign. to automatically suggest improved process designs,
as-is models, event data, change constraints, and goals are used as input.
the resulting (hopefully) improved to-be process models can be evaluated
using a combination of real event data and simulated event data.
the overall approach envisioned supports a data-driven approach to automat-
ically improve process performance. this goes far beyond existing approaches
that only support \what-if" analysis and require experts to model the process.
in conclusion, we promoted process mining as a generic technology on the
interface between data science and business process management (bpm). we
hope that process mining will become the \tail wagging the dog" (with the dog
being big data initiatives) and play a role comparable to spreadsheets. this
may seem unrealistic, but there is a clear need to bridge the gap between data
science and process management. process mining provides the glue connecting
both worlds, but there is room for improvement. as indicated, the challenge
is to move from diagnostics to semi-automated process improvement. process
mining comes in three principal avors: descriptive, predictive and prescrip-
tive. the focus has been on descriptive analytics. now it is time to focus on
predictive and prescriptive analytics. process mining tools like prom already
support techniques like prediction. however, process mining for prescriptive
analytics is still a rather unexplored territory in bpm.spreadsheets for business process management 23
references
[aalst, 2013] aalst, w.m.p. van der 2013. business process management: a comprehensive
survey. isrn software engineering, pages 1{37. doi:10.1155/2013/507984.
[aalst, 2014] aalst, w.m.p. van der 2014. data scientist: the engineer of the future.
in mertins, k., f. benaben, r. poler, & j. bourrieres (eds), proceedings of the i-esa
conference, volume 7 of enterprise interoperability , pages 13{28. springer-verlag, berlin.
[aalst, 2016] aalst, w.m.p. van der 2016. process mining: data science in action. springer-
verlag, berlin.
[aalst et al., 2012] aalst, w.m.p. van der, a. adriansyah, & b. van dongen 2012. re-
playing history on process models for conformance checking and performance analysis.
wires data mining and knowledge discovery, 2(2):182{192.
[aalst et al., 2000] aalst, w.m.p. van der, j. desel, & a. oberweis (eds) 2000. business
process management: models, techniques, and empirical studies, volume 1806 of lecture
notes in computer science . springer-verlag, berlin.
[aalst & hee, 2004] aalst, w.m.p. van der, & k.m. van hee 2004. workow management:
models, methods, and systems. mit press, cambridge, ma.
[becker et al., 2011] becker, j., m. kugeler, & m. rosemann (eds) 2011. process manage-
ment: a guide for the design of business processes, international handbooks on infor-
mation systems. springer-verlag, berlin.
[brocke & rosemann, 2010] brocke, j. vom, & m. rosemann (eds) 2010. handbook
on business process management, international handbooks on information systems.
springer-verlag, berlin.
[brocke & rosemann, 2014] brocke, j. vom, & m. rosemann (eds) 2014. handbook on
business process management 1: introduction, methods, and information systems, inter-
national handbooks on information systems. springer-verlag, berlin.
[ceruzzi, 2003] ceruzzi, p.e. 2003. a history of modern computing. mit press.
[dumas et al., 2005] dumas, m., w.m.p. van der aalst, & a.h.m. ter hofstede 2005.
process-aware information systems: bridging people and software through process tech-
nology. wiley & sons.
[dumas et al., 2013] dumas, m., m. la rosa, j. mendling, & h. reijers 2013. fundamentals
of business process management. springer-verlag, berlin.
[hofstede et al., 2010] hofstede, a.h.m. ter, w.m.p. van der aalst, m. adams, & n. rus-
sell 2010. modern business process automation: yawl and its support environment.
springer-verlag, berlin.
[jablonski & bussler, 1996] jablonski, s., & c. bussler 1996. workow management: mod-
eling concepts, architecture, and implementation. international thomson computer
press, london, uk.
[jelen, 2005] jelen, b. 2005. the spreadsheet at 25: 25 amazing excel examples that
evolved from the invention that changed the world. holy macro! books.
[leemans et al., 2014] leemans, s.j.j., d. fahland, & w.m.p. van der aalst 2014. discov-
ering block-structured process models from event logs containing infrequent behaviour.
in lohmann, n., m. song, & p. wohed (eds), business process management workshops,
international workshop on business process intelligence (bpi 2013), volume 171 of lec-
ture notes in business information processing , pages 66{78. springer-verlag, berlin.
[leemans et al., 2015] leemans, s.j.j., d. fahland, & w.m.p. van der aalst 2015. scalable
process discovery with guarantees. in gaaloul, k., r. schmidt, s. nurcan, s. guerreiro,
& q. ma (eds), enterprise, business-process and information systems modeling (bpmds
2015), volume 214 of lecture notes in business information processing , pages 85{101.
springer-verlag, berlin.
[leymann & roller, 1999] leymann, f., & d. roller 1999. production workow: concepts
and techniques. prentice-hall ptr, upper saddle river, new jersey, usa.
[mans et al., 2014] mans, r., w.m.p. van der aalst, & e. verbeek 2014. supporting process
mining workows with rapidprom. in limonad, l., & b. weber (eds), business process
management demo sessions (bpmd 2014), volume 1295 of ceur workshop proceedings ,
pages 56{60. ceur-ws.org.
[mattessich, 1964] mattessich, r. 1964. simulation of the firm through a budget com-
puter program. homewood, r.d. irwin.24 wil m.p. van der aalst
[muehlen, 2004] muehlen, m. zur 2004. workow-based process controlling: foundation,
design and application of workow-driven process information systems. logos, berlin.
[rakovic et al., 2014] rakovic, l., m. sakal, & v. pavlicevic 2014. spreadsheets - how it
started. international scientic journal of management information systems, 9(4):9{14.
[reichert & weber, 2012] reichert, m., & b. weber 2012. enabling flexibility in process-
aware information systems: challenges, methods, technologies. springer-verlag, berlin.
[smith & fingar, 2006] smith, h., & p. fingar 2006. business process management: the
third wave. meghan kier press.
[taylor, 1919] taylor, f.w. 1919. the principles of scientic management. harper and
bothers publishers, new york.
[werf et al., 2010] werf, j.m.e.m. van der, b.f. van dongen, c.a.j. hurkens, & a. sere-
brenik 2010. process discovery using integer linear programming. fundamenta infor-
maticae, 94:387{412.
[weske, 2007] weske, m. 2007. business process management: concepts, languages, ar-
chitectures. springer-verlag, berlin.
[zelst et al., 2015] zelst, s.j. van, b.f. van dongen, & w.m.p. van der aalst 2015. ilp-
based process discovery using hybrid regions. in proceedings of the international work-
shop on algorithms and theories for the analysis of event data (ataed 2015), volume
1371 of ceur workshop proceedings , pages 47{61. ceur-ws.org.