robotic process automation  
wil van der aalst (contact author)  
martin bichler  
armin  heinzl  
  
 
 
a foundational  question for many  bise (business & information systems engineering) authors and 
readers is “what should be automated and what should be done by humans ?” this question is not new. 
however, developments in data science, machine learning, and artificial intelligence force us to revisit 
this question continuously. robotic process a utomation (rpa)  is one of these developments.  rpa is 
an umbrella term for tools that operate on the user interface of other computer systems in the way a 
human would do. rpa aims to replace people by automation done  in an “outside -in’’ manner . this 
differs from the classical “inside- out” approach to improve information syste ms. unlike traditional 
workflow technology, the information system remains unchanged. gartner defines robotic process 
automation (rpa)  as follows: “rpa tools perform [if, then, else] statements on structured data, 
typically using a co mbination of user interface  interactions, or  by connecting to apis to drive client 
servers, mainframes or html code. an rpa tool operates by mapping a process in the rpa tool 
language for the software robot  to follow, with runtime alloc ated to execute the script by a contro l 
dashboard.” [9].  hence, rpa tools aim to  reduce the burden of repetitive, simple tasks on employees.  
commercial vendors of rpa tool s have witnessed a surge in demand. moreover, many new vendors 
entered the market in the last two years. this is no surpris e as m ost organizations are still looking for 
ways to cut costs and quickly link legacy applications together.  rpa is currently seen as a way  to 
quickly achieve a high return on investment (roi). there are dedicated rpa vendors like 
automationedge, automat ion anywhere, blue prism, kryon systems, softomotive , and  uipath that 
only off er rpa softw are [6,9] . there are also many  other  vendors that have embedded rpa 
functionality in their software or that are offering several tools  (not just rpa) .  for example, 
pegasystems and cognizant  provide rpa next to traditional  bpm, crm , and bi functionality. the 
goal of this editorial is to reflect on the se development s and to discuss rpa research challenges for the 
bise community . 
motivating example  
the first author recently changed employer (from eindhoven university of technology to rwth 
aachen university) and relocated from  the netherlands to germany , thereby changing health 
insurance, pension system,  tax system, banks,  etc. anyone that has made su ch a move will be aware of 
the many databases one’s name is in and that changing status and address turns  out to be a  manual 
task. it often involves making multiple phone calls  to get things right. even within the same 
organization, there are often  multiple  information systems containing information about a single 
person.  
consider for example eindhoven university of technology  (tu/e)  and rwth aachen university . 
both universities  have  information systems for salary administration, pension, personnel, teaching, 
research, projects, finance, etc. when a person leaves tu/e or is hired  by rwth , information needs to 
be added, removed, or changed in all of these  systems.  at a larger universit y, hundreds of new staff 
members  are hired each  year, and it is impossible to integrate all  information into a single system. for 
example, sap is used for finance and moodle  is used as a learning management system, but these two 
systems are completely disconnected. this requires people entering information into multiple systems 
and trying to maintain consistency. however, the work is fairly simple  and tedious . rpa provides 
agents that interact with different information systems thus partly replacing  humans. using artificial 
intelligence (ai) and machine learning (ml) , this can be done in a fairly robust manner. for 
example, the rpa agent should continue to work  properly when the web interface of some application  
changes.  the use of ai/ml help to interpret changing interfaces, thus making it very different from traditional “screen scraping” (also called web s craping or web harvesting ). ai/ml can also help to 
mimic human behavior in combining different applications (solution recepies).  
case 
frequency
(number of similar 
cases in a given 
period )
different 
types of cases
(sorted by 
frequency )traditional 
process 
automation robotic process automation
(rpa) 
candidateswork that can 
only be done by 
humans
many cases follow the 
same structured process , 
making automation 
economically feasible
there is repetitive work , 
but not frequent enough 
to justify automationinfrequent /exceptional 
cases that need to be 
handled in an ad -hoc 
manner
 
figure 1: positioning rpa.  
 
to understand the relevance of rpa , we consider  figure 1. this figure shows the “long tail of work ”. 
the x -axis shows the different types of cases. two cases are of the same type  if they are similar and 
can be handled in the same way. the y- axis shows the frequen cies of these case types. typically, one 
sees a pareto distribution. this means that 80% of the cases can be explained by 20% of the case 
types. this means that there are many case types that are rather rare. automation aims to address the 
most frequent cases types (say 20% of all case types). less frequent cases are not considered because 
automation is too expensive. costs further increase when different pr oprietary systems need to be 
integrated. therefore, the remaining 20% of the cases is often handled  manually by humans entering 
information  repeatedly  and making decisions. in such settings, humans serve as the “glue” between 
different it systems. however,  these remaining  20% of the cases, cover 80% of the case types and are 
much more time-consuming  than the frequent ones . using rpa it is possible to support the middle 
part by having agents that interact with the different information systems as if they were human. this 
is not always possible or economically viable. therefore, the “end of the long tail” (right -hand- side of 
figure 1)  still need s to be handled by human workers.  
 
straight through processing (stp) reinvented?  
according to gartner, rpa tools a re at the “peak of inflated expectations ” in the  so-called hype cycle  
[7]. there are many vendors offering rpa tools, including automationedge, automation anywhere, 
blue prism, cognizant, conduent, kofax, kryon systems, pegasystems, softomotive, and uipath. the 
sudden uptake  suggests that rpa is new. however, “process management veterans” will remember 
the hype around straight through process ing (stp) in the mid -nineties [2,5]. stp was first used in the 
financial industry . the term  refer s to processes that can be performed without any human 
involv ement . for example, allowing information that has been electronically entered to be transferred 
from one party to another in the settlement process without manually re -entering the same information 
repeatedly. this was one of the key sales features of workflow management ( wfm ) systems in the nineties (e.g., staffware). unfortuna tely, stp turned out to be applicable to only  a few processes (only 
the left -hand- side of figure 1). therefore, wfm systems evolved into busi ness process management 
(bpm) systems focusing more on the management aspects. bpm projects are often considered too 
expensive because of “inside -out” approach that is used  (the system has to be developed from scratch , 
and system integration is expensive) .  
so what is new? rpa differs from stp in two ways. first of all, rpa uses an “outside -in’’ approach 
where the existing information systems remain unchanged. instead of redesigning the system, humans 
are replaced by agents. second, rpa aims to be robust wi th respect to changes of the underlying 
information systems. when the layout of a n electronic  form changes, but the key content remains 
unchanged, the rpa software should adapt just as humans do. according to forrester, bpm has a 
legacy of  long implementations and  fuzzy business cases [6] and rpa aims to do the opposite (quick 
wins that require little investment).  
data -driven intelligence   
today, call centers and large “administrative factories” use rpa.  to achieve a more widespread 
adoption, rpa needs to become “smarter”.  the promise  is that with the use of artificial intelligence 
(ai) and machine learning (ml)  techniques, more complex and less defined tasks can be supported . 
humans learn by doing and l earn from a coach. the goal is that rpa tools learn in the same way.  for 
example, by observing human problem resolving capabilities (e.g., in case of system errors,  
unexpected system behavior, changing forms)  rpa tools can adapt and handle non -standard ca ses.  
in addition, the interplay between rpa agents and humans is interesting. when a case turns out to be 
exceptional, the rpa agent may handover the case to a human. by observing the human handling 
complex cases, the rpa system can learn.  there is also a n obvious link with process mining [1,7 ]. for 
example, rpa vendor uipath and process mining vendor celonis  collaborate to automatically 
visualize and select processes with the highest automation potential, and subsequently, build, test, and 
deploy rpa agen ts driven by the  discovered  process models . other vendors report similar use cases. 
process discovery can be used to learn processes “ by example ” and process fragments that are suitable 
for rpa can be detected  subsequently . conformance checking can be used to check for deviations, 
predict problems, and signal handovers from agents to humans.  
of course, one should be very careful. rpa agents mimicking people can start making  incorrect 
decisions because of contextual changes. this may remain  unnoticed  for some time,  leading to 
disastrous situations . there are also ethical and security risks when rpa agents impersonate people.  
the uptake of rpa  provides many  interesting research questions. some of them are not new, but 
addres sing them has become more urgent. some example questions  include  [2,4,6,8,9] : 
1. what characteristics make processes suitable to be supported by rpa? 
2. how to let rpa agents learn? how to coach rpa agents?  
3. how to control rpa agents and avoid security, complianc e, and economic risks?  
4. who is responsible when an rpa agent “misbehaves”? 
5. how can rpa agents and people seamlessly work together?  
the above questions are key topics for the bise community . therefore, the uptake of rpa provides 
interesting research opportunities. the bise community could and also should play an active role in 
driving rpa research .  
 
references  
[1] w.m.p. van der aalst. process mining: data science in action. springer -verlag, berlin, 2016.  
[2] w.m.p. van der aalst and k.m. van hee. workflow management: models, methods, and 
systems. mit p ress, cambridge, ma, 2002.  [3] s. aguirre  and a . rodriguez . automation of a business process using robotic process 
automation (rpa): a case study . applied c omputer sciences in engineering . communications  
in computer and information science, vol .742. springer , 2017.  
[4] s. chandler, c. power, m. fulton, and n. van nueten. who minds the bots?  why organisations  
need  to consider risks related to  robotic process automation . pricewaterhousecoopers . 2017.  
[5] a.h.m. te r hofstede, w.m.p. van der aalst, m. adams, and n. russell. modern business process 
automation: yawl and its support environment. springer -verlag, berlin, 2010. 
[6] c. le clair. the forrester wave: robotic process automation: the 12 providers that matter 
most a nd how they stack up . forrester, february 2017 
[7] m. kerremans. gartner market guide for process mining. report g00353970. gartner, april 
2018.  
[8] m. kirchmer. robotic process automation – pragmatic solution or dangerous illusion? bpm -
d.com/bpm -d-exhibiting -at-btoes -2/, june 2017.  
[9] c. tornbohm. gartner market guide for robotic process automation software . report 
g00319864. gartner, december 2017. 